# *Chicago Manual of Style*, 17th Edition, §2.250

## *Glossary of Problematic Words and Phrases*

5.250 **Good usage versus common usage.** The best dictionaries are signaled by the imprints of Merriam-Webster, Webster's New World, American Heritage, Oxford University Press, and Random House. But one must use care and judgment in consulting *any* dictionary. The mere presence of a word in the dictionary's pages does not mean that the word is in all respects fit for print as Standard Written English. The dictionary merely describes how speakers of English have used the language; despite occasional usage notes, lexicographers generally disclaim any intent to guide writers and editors on the thorny points of English usage—apart from collecting evidence of what others do. So *infer* is recorded as meaning, in one of its senses, *imply*; *irregardless* as meaning *regardless*; *restauranteur* as meaning *restaurateur*; and on and on. That is why, in the publishing world, it is generally necessary to consult a style or usage guide, such as *Fowler's Modern English Usage* or my own *Garner's Modern English Usage*.

**a; an.** Use the indefinite article *a* before any word beginning with a consonant sound {a euphonious phrase} {a utopian dream}. Use *an* before any word beginning with a vowel sound {an officer} {an honorary degree}. The word *historical* and its variations cause missteps, but if the *h* in these words is pronounced, it takes an *a* {an hour-long talk at a historical society}. Likewise, an initialism (whose letters are sounded out) may be paired with one article, while an acronym (which is pronounced as a word) beginning with the same letter is paired with the other {an HTML website for a HUD program}.

**ability; capability; capacity.** *Ability* refers to a person's physical or mental power or skill to do something {the ability to ride a bicycle}. *Capability* refers more generally to power or ability to do something challenging {she has the capability to play soccer professionally} or to the quality of being able to use or be used in a certain way {a jet with long-distance-flight capability}. *Capacity* refers especially to a vessel's ability to hold or contain something {a high-capacity fuel tank}. Used figuratively, *capacity* refers especially to a person's physical or mental power to learn {an astounding capacity for mathematics}. It can also be used as a synonym for *ability* {capacity for love}, as a formal word for someone's job, position, or role {in an advisory capacity}, as a word denoting an amount that can be produced or dealt with {full capacity}, or as a means of denoting size or power {engine capacity}.

**abjure; adjure.** To *abjure* is to deny or renounce publicly, especially under oath {the defendant abjured the charge of murder} or to declare one's permanent abandonment of a place {abjure the realm}. To *adjure* is to charge someone to do something as if under oath {I adjure you to keep this secret} or to try earnestly to persuade {the executive committee adjured all the members to approve the plan}. Some writers misuse *adjure* for either *abhor* (= to detest) or *require* (= to mandate).

**about; approximately.** When idiomatically possible, use the adverb *about* instead of *approximately*. In the sciences, however, *approximately* is preferred {approximately 32 coding-sequence differences were identified}. Avoid coupling either word with another word of approximation, such as *guess* or *estimate*.

**abstruse.** See *obtuse*.

**accept; except.** To *accept* something is to receive it {accept this gift} or regard it as proper {accept the idea}. To *except* something is to exclude it or leave it out {club members will be excepted from the admission charge}, and to *except* to something is to object to it.

**access, vb.** The use of nouns as verbs has long been one of the most common ways that word-usage changes happen in English. Today, few people quibble with using *contact*, *debut*, or *host*, for example, as a verb. *Access* can be safely used as a verb when referring to computing {access a computer} {access the internet} {access a database}. Outside the digital world, though, it can be jarring and is best avoided.

**accord; accordance.** The first word means "agreement" {we are in accord on the treaty's meaning} {we have reached an accord}. The second word means "conformity" {the book was printed in accordance with modern industry standards}.

**acquiesce.** To *acquiesce* is to do what someone else wants or to passively allow something to happen. The connotation is usually acceptance without enthusiasm or even with opposition that is not acted on. The word traditionally takes the preposition *in* {the minority party acquiesced in the nomination}, although *to* is also accepted. *With* is not standard.

**actual fact, in.** Redundant. Try *actually* instead, or simply omit.

**acuity; acumen.** What is *acute* is sharp, and these two words apply to mental sharpness. *Acuity* most often refers to sharpness of perception—the ability to think, see, or hear clearly {visual acuity}. *Acumen* always refers to mental prowess, especially the ability to think quickly and make good judgments.

**adduce; deduce; induce.** To *adduce* is to give as a reason, offer as a proof, or cite as an example in order to prove that something is true {as evidence of reliability, she adduced her four years of steady volunteer work as a nurse's aide}. *Deduce* and *induce* are opposite processes. To *deduce* is to reason from general principles to specific conclusions, or to draw a specific conclusion from general knowledge {from these clues about who committed the crime, one deduces that the butler did it}. In a related logical sense, to *induce* is to form a general principle based on specific observations {after years of studying ravens, the researchers induced a few of their social habits}. In its more common uses, however, to *induce* is (1) to persuade someone to do something, especially something unwise {nothing could induce me to try that again}, or (2) to cause a particular physical response {induce labor} {induce vomiting}.

**adequate; sufficient; enough.** *Adequate* refers to the suitability of something in a particular circumstance {an adequate explanation} {adequate provisions}. *Sufficient* refers to an amount that is enough to meet a particular need (always with an abstract concept, a mass noun, or a plural) {sufficient water} {sufficient information} {sufficient cause} {sufficient resources}. *Enough*, the best word for everyday purposes, meaning "as much or as many as are needed or wanted," modifies both count nouns {enough people} and mass nouns {enough oil}.

**adherence; adhesion.** With a few exceptions, the first term is figurative, the second literal. Your *adherence* to the transportation code requires the *adhesion* of an inspection sticker to your windshield.

**adjure.** See *abjure*.

**administrator.** See *executor*.

**admission; admittance.** *Admission* is generally figurative, suggesting particularly the rights and privileges granted with permission to enter {the student won admission to a first-rate university} or the price paid for entry {admission is \$10}. *Admittance* is more limited and more a matter of physical entry, but it too is tinged with the idea of permission {no admittance beyond this point}.

**adopted; adoptive.** *Adopted* applies to a child or dependent {adopted son}. It is incorrect when applied to the ones who do the adopting; instead, use *adoptive*, the more general adjective corresponding to *adopt* {adoptive parents}.

**adverse; averse.** Though etymologically related, these words have undergone differentiation. *Adverse* means either "strongly opposed" or "unfavorable" and typically refers to things (not people) {adverse relations between the nations complicated matters} {an adverse wind blew the ship off course}. *Averse* means "feeling negatively about" or "having a strong dislike or unwillingness," and it refers to people {he's averse to asking for directions}.

**affect; effect.** *Affect*, almost always a verb, means "to influence or do something that produces a change; to have an effect on" {the adverse publicity affected the election}. To *affect* can also mean "to pretend to have a particular feeling or manner" {affecting a Scottish accent}. (The noun *affect* has a specialized meaning in psychology: emotional expressiveness. Consult your dictionary.) *Effect*, usually a noun, means "an outcome, result" {the candidate's attempted explanations had no effect} or "a change caused by an event, action, occurrence, etc." {harmful effects of smoking}. But it may also be a verb meaning "to make happen, produce" {the goal had been to effect a major change in campus politics}.

**affirmative, in the; in the negative.** These are slightly pompous ways of saying *yes* and *no*. They result in part because people are unsure how to punctuate *yes* and *no*. The ordinary way is this: *he said yes* (without quotation marks around *yes*, and without a capital); *she said no* (ditto).

**afflict.** See **inflict**.

**affront.** See **effrontery**.

**after having [+ past participle].** Though common, this phrasing is redundant. Try instead *after* [+ present participle]: change *after having passed the audition, she . . .* to *after passing the audition, she . . .* Or this: *having passed the audition, she . . .* See 5.110.

**afterward, adv.; afterward, n.** The first means "later"; the second means "an epilogue." On *afterward(s)*, see **toward**.

**aggravate.** Traditionally, *aggravate* most properly means "to intensify (something bad)" {aggravate an injury} {an aggravated crime}. If the sense is "to bother," try *annoy* or *irritate* or *exasperate* instead.

**aid; aide.** *Aid* can be a verb (= to help) or a noun (= assistance). *Aide* is a noun (= helper), as in *teacher's aide*; in military parlance, it denotes someone assigned to help a superior officer {general's aide}.

**ain't.** This contraction is famously dialectal—a word not to be used except either in the dialogue of a nonstandard speaker or in jest.

**alibi.** Avoid this as a synonym for *excuse*. The traditional sense is "the defense of having been elsewhere when a crime was committed."

**all (of).** Delete the *of* whenever possible {all the houses} {all my children}. The most common exception occurs when *all of* precedes a nonpossessive pronoun {all of us} {all of them}.

**alleged.** Traditional usage applies this participial adjective to things, especially acts {alleged burglary}, not to the actors accused of doing them {alleged burglar}. That distinction is still observed by some publications, but it has largely been abandoned. Although *allegedly* /ə-lej-əd-lee/ has four syllables, *alleged* has only two: /ə-lejd/.

**all ready.** See **already**.

**all right.** Two words. Avoid *alright*, which has long been regarded as nonstandard.

**all together.** See **altogether**.

**allude; elude; illude.** To *allude* is to hint at something indirectly {he alluded to the war by mentioning "our recent national unpleasantness"}. It's often loosely used where *refer* or *quote* would be better—that is, where there is a direct mention or quotation. To *elude* is to avoid capture {the fox eluded the hunters}. To *illude* (quite rare) is to deceive {your imagination might illude you}.

**allusion; reference.** An *allusion* is an indirect or casual mention or suggestion of something {the cockroach in this story is an allusion to Kafka}. A *reference* is a direct or formal mention {the references in this scholarly article have been meticulously documented}. See **reference**.

**alongside.** This term, meaning "at the side of," should not be followed by *of*.  
a lot. Two words, not one.

**already; all ready.** The first refers to time {the movie has already started}; the second refers to preparation {are the actors all ready?}.

**alright.** See **all right**.

**altar, n.; alter, vb.** An *altar* is a table or similar object used for sacramental purposes. To *alter* is to change.

**alternate, adj. & n.; alternative, adj. & n.** *Alternate* implies (1) a substitute for another {we took the alternate route} or (2) every other or every second {alternate Saturdays}. *Alternative* implies availability as another, usually sounder choice or possibility {alternative fuel sources}. The noun uses are analogous {the awards committee named her as alternate} {we have no alternative}.

**altogether; all together.** *Altogether* means "wholly" or "entirely" {that story is altogether false}. *All together* refers to a unity of time or place {the family will be all together at Thanksgiving}.

**amend; emend.** The first is the general term, meaning "to change or add to something written or spoken" {the city amended its charter to abolish at-large council districts} or "to make better" {amend your behavior!}. The second means "to remove one or more mistakes from" (as of a text) {for the second printing, the author emended several typos that had reached print in the first}. The noun corresponding to *amend* is *amendment*; the one corresponding to *emend* is *emendation*.

**amiable; amicable.** Both mean "friendly," but *amiable* refers to people who are easy to like {an amiable waiter} and *amicable* to relationships that involve goodwill and a lack of quarreling {an amicable divorce}.

**amid.** See **between**.

**among.** See **between**.

**amount; number.** *Amount* is used with mass nouns {a decrease in the amount of pollution} {a small amount of money}. *Number* is used with count nouns {a growing number of dissidents} {the number of coins in your pocket}.

**an.** See **a**.

**and.** Popular belief to the contrary, this conjunction usefully begins sentences, typically outperforming *moreover*, *additionally*, *in addition*, *further*, and *furthermore*.

*thermore*. Yet it does not occur as a sentence-starter as often as *but*. See *but*; see also 5.203.

**and/or**. Avoid this Janus-faced term. It can often be replaced by *and* or *or* with no loss in meaning. Where it seems needed {take a sleeping pill and/or a warm drink}, try... *or*..., or *both* {take a sleeping pill or a warm drink, or both}. But think of other possibilities {take a sleeping pill, perhaps with a warm drink}.

**anecdotal**. This adjective corresponds to *anecdote*, but in one sense the words have opposite connotations. An anecdote is a story that is thought (but not known) to be true. But *anecdotal evidence* refers to accounts that are suspect because they are not rigorously verified.

**angry**. See *mad*.

**anxious**. Avoid it as a synonym for *eager*. The standard sense is "worried, nervous, distressed."

**anyone; any one**. The one-word *anyone* is a singular indefinite pronoun used in reference to no one in particular {anyone would know that}. The two-word phrase *any one* is a more emphatic form of *any*, referring to a single person or thing in a group {do you recognize any one of those boys?} {I don't know any one of those stories}.

**anyplace**. See *anywhere*.

**anyway; anyways**. The former is standard; the latter, traditionally considered dialectal, has made inroads into the speech of many otherwise educated people born since about 1980. But it remains nonstandard.

**anywhere; any place**. The first is preferred for an indefinite location {my keys could be anywhere}. But *any place* (two words) is narrower when you mean "any location" {they couldn't find any place to sit down and rest}. Avoid the informal one-word *anyplace*.

**appertain**. See *pertain*.

**appraise; apprise**. To *appraise* is to assess or put a value on something {the jeweler appraised the necklace}. To *apprise* is to inform or notify someone about something {keep me apprised of any developments}.

**appreciate**. Three senses: (1) to understand fully; (2) to increase in value; (3) to be grateful for (something). Sense 3 often results in verbose constructions; instead of *I would appreciate it if you would let me know*, try *I would appreciate your letting me know* or, more simply, *please let me know*.

**apprise**. See *appraise*.

**approve; endorse**. *Approve* implies positive thought or a positive attitude rather than action apart from consent. *Endorse* implies both a positive attitude and active support.

**approve (of)**. *Approve* alone connotes official sanction or acceptance {the finance committee approved the proposed budget}. *Approve of* suggests thinking favorably about {she approved of her sister's new hairstyle}.

**approximately**. See *about*.

**apt; likely**. Both mean "fit, suitable," but *apt* is used for general tendencies or

**habits** {the quarterback is apt to drop the football}. *Likely* expresses probability {because he didn't study, it's likely that he'll do poorly on the exam}. Although *likely* is traditional as a synonym of *probable*, many writers and editors object to its use as a synonym of *probably*. *Apt* has two other senses: (1) "exactly right for a given situation or purpose" {an apt remark} and (2) "quick to learn" {an apt pupil}.

**area**. Often a nearly meaningless filler word, as in *the area of partnering skills*. Try deleting *the area of*. In the sciences, however, its more literal meaning is often important and should be retained. See also **space**.

**as far as**. Almost always wordy. Avoid the nonstandard phrasing that uses *as far as* in place of *as for*—that is, avoid using *as far as* without the completing verb *is concerned* or *goes*. Even with the verb, though, this is usually a wordy construction. Compare *as far as change is concerned*, it's welcome with *as for change, it's welcome*.

**as is**. In reference to an acquisition, *as is* is framed in quotation marks and refers to the acceptance of something without guarantees or representations of quality {purchased "as is"}. The phrase *on an "as is" basis* is verbose.

**as of yet**. See **as yet**.

**as per**. This phrase, though common in the commercial world, has long been considered nonstandard. Instead of *as per your request*, write *as you requested* or (less good) *per your request*. The recent innovation *as per usual* for *as usual* is an illiteracy.

**assault; battery**. These are popularly given the same meaning. But in law *assault* refers to a threat that causes someone to reasonably fear physical violence, and *battery* refers to a violent or repugnant intentional physical contact with another person. In the strict legal sense, an assault doesn't involve touching; a battery does.

**assemblage; assembly**. An *assemblage* is an informal collection of people or things. An *assembly* is a group of people, especially decision makers, organized for a purpose {a national assembly}; a meeting {regular public assemblies}; or the process of putting together the parts of something {instructions for assembly}.

**assent; consent**. The meanings are similar, but *assent* connotes a more affirmative agreement after careful consideration; *consent* connotes mere allowance, or sometimes grudging acquiescence.

**as such**. This pronominal phrase always requires an antecedent for *such* {science is the organized search for truth and, as such, must be looked upon as an end in itself}. The phrase is now often loosely used as a synonym for *therefore*. Avoid this misusage {science seeks out truth in an organized way and, as such, must be looked upon as an end in itself}.

**assumption; presumption**. An *assumption* is not drawn from strong evidence; typically, it is a hypothesis that one accepts as true without definite proof {your assumption can be tested by looking at the public records}. A *presumption* im-

plies a basis in evidence or at least experience; if uncontradicted, a *presumption* may support a decision {the legal presumption of innocence}.

**assure.** See **ensure**.

**as to.** This two-word preposition is best used only to begin a sentence that could begin with *on the question of* or *with regard to* {as to those checks, she didn't know where they came from}. Otherwise, use *about* or some other preposition.

**as yet; as of yet.** Stilted and redundant. Use *yet*, *still*, *so far*, or some other equivalent.

**attain; obtain.** To *attain* something is either to accomplish it through effort (e.g., a goal) {she soon attained a position of power} or to reach a particular age, size, level, etc. {the stock market attained a new high this morning}. To *obtain* something is to get it or gain possession of it {obtaining information}. In best usage, you *attain* a degree and *obtain* a diploma. It can be a fine distinction, and in common usage the words are often treated as synonyms.

**at the present time; at this time; at present.** These are turgid substitutes for *now*, *today*, *currently*, or even *nowadays* (a word of perfectly good literary standing). Of the three phrases, *at present* is least suggestive of bureaucratese.

**at the time that; at the time when.** Use the plain and simple *when* instead.

**auger; augur.** The spellings of these words can be tricky because they are pronounced the same /aw-gr/. The tool for boring is an *auger*. *Augur* means "a clairvoyant or seer" (noun) or "to foretell" (verb). *Augurs well* is an idiomatic equivalent of *bodes well*. The related noun *augury* refers to an indication of what will happen in the future.

**avenge, vb.; revenge, vb. & n.** *Avenge* connotes an exaction for a wrong {historically, family grudges were privately avenged}. The corresponding noun is *vengeance*. *Revenge* connotes the infliction of harm on another out of anger or resentment {the team is determined to revenge its humiliating loss in last year's championship game}. *Revenge* is much more commonly a noun {they didn't want justice—they wanted revenge}.

**averse.** See **adverse**.

**avocation; vocation.** An *avocation* is a hobby or pleasant pastime {stamp collecting is my weekend avocation}. A *vocation* is one's profession or, especially in a religious sense, one's calling {she had a true vocation and became a nun}.

**awhile; a while.** The one-word version is adverbial; it means "for a short time" {let's stop here awhile}. The two-word version is a noun phrase that follows the preposition *for* or *in* {she worked for a while before beginning graduate studies}.

**backward(s).** See **toward**.

**bale; bail.** The somewhat less common term is *bale* (= a bundle or to form into a bundle, as of hay or cotton). *Bail* is most often a verb (= to drain by scooping, as of getting water out of a boat using a pail); it is also a noun and verb regarding the posting of security to get out of jail pending further proceedings. *Bail* is also used informally to denote leaving quickly or escaping {the couple bailed from the party}. To *bail out* someone (a phrasal verb) is to get the person out of trouble.

**based on.** This phrase has two legitimate and two illegitimate uses. It may unimpeachably have verbal force (*base* being a transitive verb, as in *they based their position on military precedent*) or, in a passive sense, adjectival force (*based* being read as a past-participial adjective, as in *a sophisticated thriller based on a John le Carré novel*). Two uses, however, are traditionally considered slipshod. *Based on* should not have adverbial force (as in *Rates are adjusted annually, based on the 91-day Treasury bill*) or prepositional force (as a dangling participle, as in *Based on this information, we decided to stay*). Try other constructions {rates are adjusted annually on the basis of the 91-day Treasury bill} {with this information, we decided to stay}.

**basis.** Much overworked, this word most properly means "foundation; the facts, things, or ideas from which something can be developed." It often appears in the phrase *on a . . . basis* or some similar construction. When possible, substitute adverbs (*personally*, not *on a personal basis*) or simply state the time (*daily*, not *on a daily basis*). The plural is *bases* {the legislative bases are complicated}.

**bated breath.** So spelled—not *baited breath*. Someone who waits with *bated breath* is anxious or excited (literally "holding [abating] one's breath").

**battery.** See *assault*.

**begging the question.** This phrase traditionally denotes a logical fallacy of assuming as true what has yet to be proved—or adducing as proof for some proposition something that's every bit as much in need of proof as the first proposition. For example, someone might try to "prove" the validity of a certain religion by quoting from that religion's holy text. But the phrase gets misused in many ways—as (erroneously) meaning "prompting a question," "inviting an obvious question," "evading a question," and "ignoring a question."

**behalf.** *In behalf of* means "in the interest or for the benefit of" {the decision is in behalf of the patient}. *On behalf of* means "acting as agent or representative of" {on behalf of Mr. Scott, I would like to express heartfelt thanks}.

**bemused.** This word means "bewildered, distracted, or confused." It is not a synonym of *amused*.

**benevolence; beneficence.** *Benevolence* is the attribute of being disposed to kindness or capable of doing good {the priest's benevolence was plainly evident}. It applies most often to people but may also apply to things that are beneficial. *Beneficence* is a major act of kindness or the performance of good deeds generally {the villagers thanked him for his beneficence}. The first term denotes a quality, the second conduct.

**beside; besides.** *Beside* is a preposition of position, whether literal {beside the road} or figurative {beside the point}. *Besides* may be a preposition meaning "other than" {who's going besides us?} or an adverb meaning "also" or "anyway" {besides, who wants to know?}.

**between; among; amid.** *Between* indicates one-to-one relationships {between you and me}. *Among* indicates undefined or collective relationships {honor among thieves}. *Between* has long been recognized as being perfectly appropriate for more than two objects if multiple one-to-one relationships are understood from the context {trade between members of the European Union}. *Amid* is often used with mass nouns {amid talk of war}—though it can often be used with abstract nouns in the plural {resigned amid rumors of misconduct} {the investigation comes amid growing concerns}. *Among* is invariably used with plurals of count nouns {among the children}. Avoid *amidst* and *amongst*, especially in American English.

**between you and me.** This is the correct phrasing—not *between you and I*, which is a classic example of hypercorrection. Both pronouns function as objects of the preposition *between*. True, Shakespeare put the phrase 'tween you and I in a character's mouth, but that was at a time when English grammar was much less settled than it came to be in the eighteenth century—and that usage was an outlier even in the Elizabethan era. Further, the sociolinguistic point that Shakespeare might have been making by having a character speak that phrase may well be lost in the mists of time.

**bi-; semi-.** Generally, *bi-* means "two" (*biweekly* means "every two weeks"), while *semi-* means "half" (*semiweekly* means "twice a week"). Because these prefixes are often confused with each other, writers should be explicit about the meaning.

**biannual; semiannual; biennial.** *Biannual* and *semiannual* both mean "twice a year" {these roses bloom biannually}. But *biennial* means "once every two years" or "every other year" {our legislature meets biennially}. To avoid confusion, write *semiannual* instead of *biannual*, and consider writing *once every two years* instead of *biennial*.

**billion; trillion.** The meanings can vary in different countries. In the United States, a *billion* is 1,000,000,000. In Great Britain, Canada, and Germany, a *billion* is traditionally a thousand times more than that (a million millions, or what Americans call a *trillion*)—though the American English sense now predominates even in British English. Further, in Great Britain a *trillion* is traditionally a million million millions, what Americans would call a *quintillion* (1,000,000,000,000,000,000). Although the American definitions are gaining acceptance, writers need to remember the historical geographic distinctions. See also 9.8.

**blatant; flagrant.** An act that is *blatant* is both bad and plain for all to see {a blatant error}. One that is *flagrant* is done brazenly as well as openly, often with a stronger suggestion of shocking illegality or immorality {a flagrant violation of the law}.

**bombastic.** A *bombastic* speech or essay is pompously long-winded and self-important but essentially empty of substance. The word has nothing to do with temper.

**born; borne.** *Born* is used only as an adjective {a born ruler} or in the fixed passive-voice verb *to be born* {the child was born into poverty}. *Borne* is the general past participle of *bear* {this donkey has borne many heavy loads} {she has borne three children}. It is also used to form compound terms {foodborne} {vectorborne}.

**both-and.** These correlative conjunctions should frame matching syntactic parts.

Hence don't write *She is both a writer and she skis professionally*, but instead *She is both a writer and a professional skier*.

**breach, n. & vb.; breech, n.** A *breach* is a gap in or violation of something {a breach of contract} or a serious disagreement {healing the breach between the nations}. To *breach* is to break, break open, or break through {breach the castle walls}. *Breech* refers to the lower or back part of something, especially the buttocks {a breech birth} or the part of a modern firearm where bullets are inserted {the rifle's breech}.

**bring; take.** The distinction may seem obvious, but the error is common. The simple question is, Where is the action directed? If it's toward you, use *bring* {bring home the bacon}. If it's away from you, use *take* {take out the trash}. You *take* (not *bring*) your car to the mechanic.

**but.** Popular belief to the contrary, this conjunction usefully begins contrasting sentences, typically with greater strength and speed than *however*. Avoid putting a comma after it. Cf. **and**; see also 5.203.

**by means of.** Often verbose. Use *by* or *with* if either one suffices.

**by reason of.** Use *because* or *because of* unless *by reason of* is part of an established phrase {by reason of insanity}.

**cache; cachet.** *Cache*, a count noun, refers either to a quantity of goods or valuables that have been stashed away or to a storage buffer within a computer.

*Cachet*, generally a mass noun, refers most commonly to prestige or fetching appeal—or else a seal on a document or a commemorative design. *Cachet* sometimes appears, incorrectly, as *caché*.

**can; could.** *Can* means "to be able to" and expresses certainty {I can be there in five minutes}. *Could* is better for a sense of uncertainty or a conditional statement {could you stop at the cleaners today?} {if you send a deposit, we could hold your reservation}. See 5.146.

**can; may.** *Can* most traditionally applies to physical or mental ability {she can do calculations in her head} {the dog can leap over a six-foot fence}. In colloquial English, *can* also expresses a request for permission {can I go to the movies?}, but this usage is not recommended in formal contexts. *May* suggests possibility {the class may have a pop quiz tomorrow} or permission {you may borrow my car}. A denial of permission is properly phrased formally with *may not* {you may not borrow my credit card} or, less formally, with *cannot* or *can't* {you can't use the computer tonight}. See 5.146, 5.147.

**cannon; canon.** A *cannon* is an artillery weapon that fires metal balls or other missiles. A *canon* is (1) a general rule or principle, (2) an established criterion,

(3) the sum of a writer or composer's work, (4) the collective literature accepted by a scholastic discipline, (5) a piece of music in which a tune is started by one performer and is mimicked by each of the others, or (6) a Christian priest having special duties within a church or cathedral.

**capability.** See **ability**.

**capacity.** See **ability**.

**capital; capitol.** A *capital* is a seat of government (usually a city) {Jefferson City is the capital of Missouri}. A *capitol* is a building in which a legislature meets {the legislature opened its new session in the capitol today}.

**carat; karat; caret.** *Carat* measures the weight of a gemstone; *karat* measures the purity of gold. To remember the difference, think of *24K gold*. (In British English, the spelling *carat* serves in both senses.) *Caret* is a mark on a manuscript indicating where matter is to be inserted; borrowed from Latin in the seventeenth century, it literally means "(something) is lacking."

**career; careen.** The word *career*'s career as a verb meaning "to go full speed" may be about over, except in British English (in which the two verbs contend in what is still a tight race). In American English, its duties have been assumed by *careen* (traditionally, "to tip to one side while moving"), even though nothing in that verb's time-honored definition denotes high speed. So today in American English it's typically *careened down the hill* but in British English *careered down the hill*.

**caret.** See **carat**.

**case.** This multifaceted word is often a sign of verbal inflation, especially in its uses as a near-synonym of *situation*. For example, *in case* means "if"; *in most cases* means "usually"; *in every case* means "always." The word is justifiably used in law (in which a *case* is a lawsuit or judicial opinion) and in medicine (in which the word refers to an instance of a disease or disorder). By extension, it has analogous senses in social work, criminal detection, etc. Of course, the word can also denote a box or container {briefcase}, an argument or set of reasons {state your case}, or a grammatical word form.

**cause célèbre.** This word most strictly denotes a legal case, especially a prosecution, that draws great public interest. By extension, it refers to a notorious episode, event, or even person. It does not properly denote a person's pet cause. Though it retains its acute and grave accents, the phrase is now considered naturalized enough not to be italicized (except when called out as a phrase, as in the next sentence). Yet the plural retains its French form: *causes célèbres*.

**censer; censor, n.; sensor.** The correct spellings can be elusive. A *censer* is either a person who carries a container of burning incense or the container itself. A *censor* is a person who suppresses objectionable subject matter. A *sensor* is a mechanical or electronic device for discovering light, heat, movement, etc.

**censor, vb.; censure, vb.** To *censor* is to review books, films, letters, and the like to remove objectionable material—that is, to suppress {soldiers' letters are often censored in wartime}. To *censure* is to criticize strongly or disapprove, or to officially reprimand {the House of Representatives censured the president for the invasion} {in some countries the government *censors* the press; in the United States the press often *censures* the government}.

**center around.** Although this illogical phrasing does have apologists, stylists tend to use either *center on* or *revolve around*.

**certainty; certitude.** If you are absolutely sure about something, you display both *certainty* (firm conviction) and *certitude* (assurance of being certain). That fact you are sure about, however, is a *certainty* but not a *certitude*—the latter is a trait applied to people only.

**chair; chairman; chairwoman; chairperson.** *Chair* is widely regarded as the best gender-neutral choice. Since the mid-seventeenth century, *chair* has referred to an office of authority. See also 5.251–60.

**childish; childlike.** *Childlike* is used positively to connote innocence, eagerness, and freshness {a childlike smile}. *Childish* is pejorative; it connotes immaturity, silliness, and unreasonableness {childish ranting}.

**chord; cord.** *Chord* denotes (1) a group of harmonically consonant notes {major chords} {minor chords} or (2) a straight line joining the ends of an arc (sense 2 being a technical term in mathematics and engineering). *Cord* is the word denoting a thick string or rope {spinal cord} {umbilical cord} {vocal cord}, an enclosed wire that supplies electricity to an appliance or other equipment, or a quantity of firewood.

**circumstances.** Both *in the circumstances* and *under the circumstances* are acceptable, but *under* is now much more common in American English. *In* predominates in British English.

**cite, n.; site.** As a noun, *cite* is colloquial for *citation*, which refers to a source of information {a cite to *Encyclopaedia Britannica*}. A *site* is a place or location used for a particular purpose {building site} {website}. Cf. **sight**.

**citizen; subject.** In a governmental sense, these are near-synonyms that should be distinguished. A *citizen* owes allegiance to a nation whose sovereignty is a collective function of the people {a citizen of Germany}. A *subject* owes allegiance to an individual sovereign because the form of government is monarchical {a subject of the queen}.

**class.** This word denotes a category or group of things that are considered together because of their similarities {the class of woodwind instruments}. Properly, a *class* is never one type {the oboe is a type of woodwind} or one kind of thing {a drum is one kind of percussion instrument}.

**classic; classical.** *Classic* means "important, authoritative, outstanding" {*The Naked Night* is one of Ingmar Bergman's classic films}. *Classical* applies to a traditional set of values in literature, music, design, and other fields {classical Greek} {a classical composer} or to the definitive or earliest-characterized form {classical EEC syndrome}.

**clean; cleanse.** Although various cleaning agents are called "cleansers," *clean*

displaced *cleanse* long ago in most of the word's literal senses. *Cleanse* retains the Old English root meaning "pure": its use today usually refers to spiritual or moral (or gastrointestinal) purification.

**cleave.** This verb was originally two different words, and that difference is reflected in the opposite meanings that *cleave* has: (1) to cut apart {to cleave meat} and (2) to cling together {standing in the rain, his clothes cleaving to his body}. (When a term is its own antonym, it is known as a *contronym*.) The conjugations are (1) *cleave, cleft* (or *clove*), *cleft* (or *cloven*); and (2) *cleave, cleaved, cleaved*.

**clench; clinch.** *Clench*, which connotes a physical action, normally involves a person's hands, teeth, jaw, or stomach {he clenched his hand into a fist}. *Clinch*, the more common term, has mostly figurative uses about finally achieving something after a struggle {clinched the title} {clinched the victory}. But there is an exception to the nonphysical uses of *clinch*: if two people *clinch*, they hold each other's arms tightly, as in boxing.

**climactic; climatic.** *Climactic* is the adjective corresponding to *climax* {during the movie's climactic scene, the projector broke}. *Climatic* corresponds to *climate* {the climatic conditions of northern New Mexico}.

**clinch.** See *clench*.

**close proximity.** Redundant. Write either *close* or *in proximity*.

**closure; cloture.** *Closure* denotes the temporary or permanent closing or final resolution of something. *Closure* denotes the parliamentary procedure of closing debate and taking a vote on a legislative bill or other measure.

**cohabit; cohabitate.** *Cohabit* is the traditional verb for living with another person in a sexual relationship without being married. *Cohabitate*, a back-formation from *cohabitation*, is best avoided.

**collaborate; corroborate.** To *collaborate* is to cooperate on some undertaking, especially in the arts or sciences {the participants are collaborators}. To *corroborate* something is to back up its reliability with proof or evidence {the expert corroborated the witness's testimony}.

**collegial; collegiate.** *Collegial* answers to *colleague* {a healthy collegial work environment}; *collegiate* answers to *college* {collegiate sports}.

**commendable; commendatory.** What is done for a worthy cause is *commendable* {commendable dedication to helping the poor}. What expresses praise is *commendatory* {commendatory plaque}.

**common; mutual.** What is *common* is shared by two or more people {borne by different mothers but having a common father}. What is *mutual* is reciprocal or directly exchanged by and toward each other {mutual obligations}. Strictly, *friend in common* is better than *mutual friend* in reference to a third person who is a friend of two others.

**commonweal; commonwealth.** The *commonweal* is the public welfare. Traditionally, a *commonwealth* was a state established by public compact or by the consent of the people to promote the general good (commonweal), and where

the people reserved supreme authority. In the United States, the word is synonymous with *state*, four of which are still called commonwealths: Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is also a US territory.

**compare.** To *compare with* is to discern both similarities and differences between things. To *compare to* is to liken things or to note primarily similarities between them, especially in the active voice {Are you comparing me to *him*? I hope not!}.

**compelled; impelled.** If you are *compelled* to do something, you have no choice in the matter {Nixon was compelled by the unanimous Supreme Court decision to turn over the tapes}. If you are *impelled* to do something, you still may not like it, but you are convinced that it must be done {the voter disliked some candidates but was impelled by the income-tax issue to vote a straight-party ticket}. Whereas *compel* connotes an outside force, *impel* connotes an inner drive.

**compendious; voluminous.** These are not synonyms, as many apparently believe. *Compendious* means "concise, abridged." *Voluminous*, literally "occupying many volumes," most commonly means "vast" or "extremely lengthy."

**complacent; complaisant; compliant.** To be *complacent* is to be content with oneself and one's life—with the suggestion that one may be smugly unwilling to improve or unprepared for future trouble. To be *complaisant* is to be easygoing and eager to please others. To be *compliant* is to be amenable to orders or to a regimen imposed by others.

**compliment; complement.** A *compliment* is a flattering or praising remark {a compliment on your skill}. A *complement* is something that completes or brings to perfection {the lace tablecloth was a complement to the antique silver}. The words are also verbs: to *compliment* is to praise, while to *complement* is to supplement adequately or to complete. In the grammatical sense, a *complement* is a word or phrase that follows the verb to complete the predicate. The corresponding adjectives are *complimentary*, meaning (1) "expressing praise" or (2) "given to someone free of charge"; and *complementary*, meaning (1) "going well together, despite differences," or (2) "consisting of two geometric angles that, added together, take up 90 degrees."

**comprise; compose.** Use with care. To *comprise* is "to consist of, to include" {the whole comprises the parts}. To *compose* is "to make up, to form the substance of something" {the parts compose the whole}. The phrase *is comprised of*, though increasingly common, remains nonstandard. Instead, try *is composed of* or *consists of*. See *include*.

**concept; conception.** Both words may refer to an abstract thought, but *conception* also means "the act of forming an abstract thought." Avoid using either word as a high-sounding equivalent of *idea*, *design*, *thought*, or *program*.

**condole, vb.; console, vb.** These are closely related but not identical. To *condole*

*with* is to express sympathy to {community leaders condoled with the victims' families}. The corresponding noun is *condolence* {they expressed their condolences at the funeral}. To *console* is to comfort in a time of distress or disappointment {the players consoled their humiliated coach}. The corresponding noun is *consolation* {their kind words were small consolation}.

**confidant; confidante; confident.** A *confidant* is a close companion, someone (male or female) you confide in. *Confidante*, a feminine form, is a fading alternative spelling of *confidant* (used only in reference to a female confidant). It reflects French gender spellings. *Confident* is the adjective meaning "sure that something will happen in the way one wants or expects" or "sure that something is true."

**congruous; congruent.** Both terms mean "in harmony, in agreement." The first is seen most often in its negative form, *incongruous*, meaning "strange, unexpected, or unsuitable in a particular situation" {the modern house looks incongruous in this old neighborhood}. The second is used in math to describe triangles that are identical in their angles as well as in the length of their sides {congruent angles}.

**connote; denote.** To *connote* (in reference to language) is to convey a meaning beyond the basic one, especially through emotive nuance {the new gerund *parenting* and all that it connotes}. To *denote* (again in reference to language) is to specify the literal meaning of something {the phrase *freezing point* denotes 32 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 degrees Celsius}. Both words have figurative uses {all the joy that parenthood connotes} {a smile may not denote happiness}.

**consent.** See **assent**.

**consequent; subsequent.** The first denotes causation; the second does not. A *consequent* event always happens after the event that caused it, as does a *subsequent* event. But a *subsequent* event does not necessarily occur as a result of the first: it could be wholly unrelated but merely later in time.

**consider.** Add *as* only when you mean "to examine or discuss for a particular purpose" {handshaking considered as a means of spreading disease}. Otherwise, omit *as* {we consider him qualified}.

**consist.** There are two distinct phrases: *consist of* and *consist in*. The first, by far the more common one, applies to the physical components that make up a tangible thing {the computer-system package consists of software, the CPU, the monitor, and a printer}. The second refers to the essence of a thing, especially in abstract terms {moral government consists in rewarding the righteous and punishing the wicked}.

**console.** See **condole**.

**contact, vb.** If you mean *write* or *call* or *email*, say so. But *contact* is undeniably a brief way of referring to communication without specifying the means.

**contagious; infectious.** Both broadly describe a disease that is communicable.

But a *contagious* disease spreads by direct contact with an infected person or animal {rabies is a contagious disease}. An *infectious* disease is spread by germs on a contaminated object or element, such as earth or water {tetanus is infectious but not contagious}.

**contemporary; contemporaneous.** Both express coinciding time, but *contemporary* usually applies to people, and *contemporaneous* applies to things or actions. Because *contemporary* has the additional sense "modern," it is unsuitable for contexts involving multiple times. That is, a reference to *Roman, Byzantine, and contemporary belief systems* is ambiguous; change *contemporary* to *modern*.

**contemptuous; contemptible.** If you are *contemptuous*, you are feeling and showing that you think someone or something deserves no respect. If you are *contemptible*, others will have that attitude toward you.

**content; contents.** *Content* applies to the ideas, facts, or opinions in a written or oral presentation {the lecture's content was offensive to some who were present}. *Contents* usually denotes physical ingredients: the things that are inside a box, bag, room, or other container {the package's contents were difficult to discern by x-ray}. If the usage suggests many items, material or nonmaterial, *contents* is correct {table of contents} {the investigative report's contents}.

**continual; continuous.** What is *continual* may go on for a long time, but always there are brief interruptions, so that it can be characterized as intermittent or frequently repeated {continual nagging}. What is *continuous* never stops—it remains constant or uninterrupted {continuous flow of water}. A line that is continuous has no gaps or holes in it.

**contravene; controvert.** To *contravene* is to conflict with or violate (the law, a rule, etc.) {the higher speed limit contravenes our policy of encouraging fuel conservation}. To *controvert* is to challenge or contradict {the testimony controverts the witness's prior statement}.

**convince.** See *persuade*.

**copyright, vb.** This verb, meaning "to obtain the legal right to be the only producer or seller of a book, play, film, or other creative work for a specific length of time," is conjugated *copyright-copyrighted-copyrighted*. Note the spelling, which has nothing to do with *write*.

**cord.** See *chord*.

**corollary; correlation.** A *corollary* is either (1) a subsidiary proposition that follows from a proven mathematical proposition, often without requiring additional evidence to support it, or (2) a natural or incidental result of some action or occurrence. A *correlation* is a positive connection between things or phenomena. If used in the context of physics or statistics, it denotes the degree to which the observed interactions and variances are not attributable to chance alone.

**corporal; corporeal.** What is *corporal* relates in some way to the body {corporal

punishment}; what is *corporeal* has a physical form that can be touched {not our spiritual but our corporeal existence}.

**corps; core.** A *corps* is a body of like workers, as in an army, with special duties and responsibilities {Marine Corps} {press corps}. It is often misspelled like its homophone, *core*, which denotes the central or most important part of something {the core of the problem} {the earth's core}.

**correlation.** See **corollary**.

**corroborate.** See **collaborate**.

**could.** See **can**.

**couldn't care less.** This is the standard phrasing. Avoid the illogical form *could care less*.

**councillor; counselor.** A *councillor* is one who sits on a council {city councillor}. A *counselor* is one whose job is to help and advise people with problems {personal counselor}. In British English, the spelling is *counsellor*.

**couple.** Using *couple* as an adjective has traditionally been regarded as nonstandard phrasing—though it is increasingly common as a casualism. Add *of* {we watched a couple of movies}. When referring to two people as a unit {married couple}, the noun *couple* takes either a singular or a plural verb {the couple is happy} {the couple are honeymooning in Ravello}. When the pronoun *they* follows *couple*—if a pronoun is used at all, it is normally plural—the plural verb is preferable {the couple were delighted by their friends' responses}.

**court-martial.** Two words joined by a hyphen, whether the phrase functions as a noun or as a verb. Because *martial* acts as an adjective meaning "military," the plural of the noun is *courts-martial*. The third-person-singular verb is *court-martials* {if the general court-martials him, he'll have much to answer for}. In American English, the inflected spellings of the verb are *court-martialed*, *court-martialing*; in British English, the spellings are *court-martialled*, *court-martalling*.

**credible; creditable; credulous.** *Credible* means "believable; deserving trust"; *creditable* means "praiseworthy; deserving approval"; *credulous* means "gullible; tending to believe whatever one is told—and therefore easily deceived." The most common error involving cognate forms of these words is in the malapropism *strains credulity*. If some form of that cliché must be used, it should read *strains credibility*.

**crevice; crevasse.** Size matters. A crack in the sidewalk is a *crevice* (accent on the first syllable) because it's narrow and typically not very deep; a fissure in a glacier or a dam is a *crevasse* (accent on the second syllable) because it's a deep open crack.

**criminal.** See **unlawful**.

**criteria.** This is the plural form of *criterion* (= a standard for judging): one *criterion*, two *criteria*. The double plural *criterias* is a solecism.

**damp, vb.; dampen.** Both words convey the sense "to moisten." *Damp* also

means "to reduce with moisture" {damp the fire} or "to diminish vibration or oscillation of [a wire or voltage]" {damp the voltage}. In a figurative sense, *dampen* means "to make [a feeling, mood, activity, etc.] less intense or enjoyable" {dampen one's hopes}.

**data.** Though originally this word was a plural of *datum*, it is now commonly treated as a mass noun and coupled with a singular verb. In formal writing (and always in the sciences), use *data* as a plural. Whatever you do, though, use the term consistently within a single writing—either singular or (more formally) plural.

**deadly; deathly.** *Deadly* means "capable of causing death" {deadly snake venom} or "likely to cause as much harm as possible" {deadly enemies}. *Deathly* means "arousing thoughts of death or a dead body" {deathly silence}.

**decide whether; decide if.** See **determine whether**.

**decimate.** This word literally means "to kill every tenth person," a means of repression that goes back to Roman times. But the word has come to mean "to inflict heavy damage or destroy a large part of something," and this use has long been predominant. Avoid *decimate* when you are referring to complete destruction. That is, don't say that a city was *completely decimated*.

**deduce.** See **adduce**.

**defamation; libel; slander.** *Defamation* is the communication of a falsehood that damages someone's reputation. If it is recorded, especially in writing, it is *libel*; otherwise, it is *slander*.

**definite; definitive.** *Definite* means "clear, exact" {a definite yes}. *Definitive* means either "not subject to further revision in the near future" {we have a definitive agreement} or "of such high quality as to be unimprovable for a long time" {the definitive guide}.

**delegate.** See **relegate**.

**deliberate, adj.; deliberative.** As an adjective, *deliberate* means either "planned; carefully thought out" {a deliberate response} or "slow and steady" {deliberate progress}. *Deliberative* means "of, characterized by, or involving debate"; the word most often applies to an assembly {deliberative body} or a process {deliberative meetings}.

**denote.** See **connote**.

**denounce; renounce.** To *denounce* is either to criticize harshly, especially in public {they denounced the prisoner swap}, or to accuse, as by giving incriminating information about someone's illegal political activities to the authorities {denounced him to the police}. To *renounce* is either to relinquish or reject {renounced her citizenship} or to declare publicly that one no longer believes something or will no longer behave in some way {renounce violence}.

**dependant, n.; dependent, adj. & n.** In British English, the first is the preferable noun {he claimed three dependants on his tax return}; the second is the adjective {the family has become dependent on welfare}. But in American English, *dependent* is the usual form as both noun and adjective.

**depend on.** Although *upon* is best reduced to *on* in this phrase, no further reduction is idiomatic: *depend* demands an *on*. Hence don't write *That depends how we approach the problem* but rather *That depends on how we approach the problem*.

**deprecate.** In general, to *deprecate* is to strongly disapprove or criticize. But in the phrase *self-deprecating*—which began as a mistaken form of *self-depreciating* but is now standard—the sense of *deprecate* is "to belittle." In computing, *deprecate* serves as a warning: a *deprecated* feature or function is one that may be phased out of a future release of software, so users should begin looking for alternatives.

**derisive; derisory.** What is *derisive* ridicules as stupid or silly {derisive laughter}. What is *derisory* invites or deserves ridicule {that derisory "banana" hat}, especially when a laughably small amount of money is offered or given {my derisory paychecks}.

**deserts; desserts.** The first are deserved {he got his just deserts}, the second eaten {the many desserts on the menu}. *Just desserts* is a common misspelling (unless the meaning is "only postprandial sweets").

**despite; in spite of.** For brevity, prefer *despite*.

**determine whether; determine if.** The first phrasing is irreproachable style; the second is acceptable as a colloquialism. The same is true of *decide whether* versus *decide if*.

**different.** The phrasing *different from* is generally considered preferable to *different than* {this company is different from that one}, but sometimes the adverbial phrase *differently than* is all but required {she described the scene differently than he did}. In British English, *different to* is not uncommon—but it is distinctively British English, whereas *different from* is standard everywhere.

**differ from; differ with.** *Differ from* is the usual construction denoting a contrast {the two species differ from each other in subtle ways}. *Differ with* regards differences of opinion {the state's senators differ with each other on many issues}.

**disburse; disperse.** To *disburse* is to distribute money, especially from a large sum available for some specific purpose. To *disperse* is (1) to spread in various directions over a wide area {the clouds dispersed} or (2) to cause to go away in different directions {police dispersed the unruly crowd}.

**disc.** See **disk**.

**discomfort; discomfit.** *Discomfort* is a noun meaning "ill at ease." It can also be used as a verb meaning "to put ill at ease." But doing so often invites confusion with *discomfit*, which originally meant "to defeat utterly." Today it means "to thwart, confuse, annoy, or embarrass" {the ploy discomfited the opponent}. The distinction has become a fine one, since a *discomfited* person is also uncomfortable. *Discomfort* is the corresponding noun.

**discreet; discrete.** *Discreet* means either "careful about not divulging secrets or upsetting others" {a discreet silence} or "showing modest taste; nonostentatious" {discreet jewelry}. *Discrete* means "separate, distinct, unconnected" {six discrete parts}.

**discriminating, adj.; discriminatory.** The word *discrimination* can be used in either a negative or a positive sense, and these adjectives reflect that ambivalence. *Discriminatory* means "reflecting a biased, unfair treatment" {discriminatory employment policy}. *Discriminating* means "analytically refined, discerning, tasteful" {a discriminating palate}.

**disinterested.** This word should be reserved for the sense "not having a financial personal interest at stake and therefore able to judge a situation fairly; impartial." Avoid it as a replacement for *uninterested* (which means "unconcerned, bored").

**disk; disc.** *Disk* is the usual spelling {hard disk} {disk drive}. But *disc* is preferred in a few specialized applications {compact disc} {disc brakes} {disc harrow}—particularly where the object in question is circular and flat.

**disorganized; unorganized.** Both mean "not organized," but *disorganized* suggests (1) a group in disarray, either thrown into confusion or inherently unable to work together {the disorganized 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago}, or (2) a person who is exceedingly bad at arranging or planning things {disorganized students}.

**disperse.** See *disburse*.

**distinctive; distinguished; distinguishable.** A *distinctive* feature is something that makes a person (or place or thing) easy to recognize {U2's distinctive sound}. But it does not necessarily make that person *distinguished* (respected and admired) {the distinguished professor wears a distinctive red bow tie}. It does, however, make the person *distinguishable* (easy to see as being different from something else)—a term that does not carry the positive connotation of *distinguished*.

**dive, vb.** The preferred conjugation has traditionally been *dive-dived-dived*. The irregular form *dove*, though, has become the slightly predominant past-tense form in American English and should be accepted as standard: *dive-dove-dived*. Traditionalists will stick to the older inflection.

**doctrinal; doctrinaire.** *Doctrinal* means "of, relating to, or constituting a doctrine"; it is neutral in connotation {doctrinal differences}. *Doctrinaire* means "dogmatic," suggesting that the person described is stubborn and narrow-minded {a doctrinaire ideologue}.

**doubtfully, adv.** In recent years, this term has come into use as a sentence adverb functioning as a correlative of *hopefully* and as an antonym of *undoubtedly* {Will you be attending the party? Hopefully—but doubtfully. [That is, I hope I'll be able to go, but I doubt it.]} Should you abstain from this usage in Standard Written English? No doubt.

**doubtless, adv.** Use this form (it's called a *flat adverb*)—not *doubtlessly*. See also 5.160.

**doubt that; doubt whether; doubt if.** *Doubt that* conveys a negative sense of strong skepticism or questioning {I doubt that you'll ever get your money back}. *Doubt whether* also conveys a sense of skepticism, though less strong

{the official says that he doubts whether the company could survive}. *Doubt if* is a casual phrasing for *doubt that*.

**drag.** Conjugated *drag*-*dragged*-*dragged*. The past form *drug* is dialectal.

**dream.** Either *dreamed* (more typical in both American English and British English) or *dreamt* is acceptable for the past-tense and past-participial forms.

**drink, vb.** Correctly conjugated *drink*-*drank*-*drunk* {they had not drunk any fruit juice that day}.

**drown, vb.** Conjugated *drown*-*drowned*-*drowned*.

**drunk, adj.; drunken.** *Drunk* describes a current state of intoxication {drunk driver}. (By contrast, a *drunk*—like a *drunkard*—is someone who is habitually intoxicated.) *Drunken* describes either a trait of habitual intoxication {drunken sot} or intoxicated people's behavior {a drunken brawl}.

**dual; duel.** *Dual* is an adjective meaning "having two parts or two of something" {dual exhaust}. A *duel* is a fight between two people, especially a formal and often deadly combat with pistols or swords.

**due to.** In strict traditional usage, *due to* should be interchangeable with *attributable to* {the erratic driving was due to some prescription drugs that the driver had taken} or *owed to* {thanks are due to all who helped}. When used adverbially, *due to* is often considered inferior to *because of* or *owing to*. So in the sentence *Due to the parents' negligence, the entire family suffered*, the better phrasing would be *Because of [or Owing to] the parents' negligence, the entire family suffered*.

**due to the fact that.** Use *because* instead.

**dumb.** This word means either "stupid" or "unable to speak." In the second sense, the adjective *mute* is clearer (and less offensive) for most modern readers. But on the noun use of *mute*, see **moot**.

**dying; dyeing.** *Dying* is the present participle of *die* (= to cease living); *dyeing* is the present participle of *dye* (= to color with a liquid).

**each.** As a noun serving as the subject of a clause, *each* takes a singular verb {each of them was present that day}. But when it serves as an emphatic appositive for a plural noun, the verb is plural {they each have their virtues} {the newspapers each sell for \$3}.

**each other; one another.** Traditionalists use *each other* when two things or people are involved, *one another* when more than two are involved.

**eatable.** See **edible**.

**economic; economical.** *Economic* means "of, relating to, or involving large-scale finances" {federal economic policy}. *Economical* means "thrifty; financially efficient; cheap and not wasteful" {an economical purchase}.

**edible; eatable.** What is *edible* is fit for human consumption {edible flowers}. What is *eatable* is at least minimally palatable {the cake is slightly burned but still eatable}.

**effect.** See **affect**.

**effete.** Traditionally, it has meant "worn out, sterile" or "lacking power, character,

or vitality." Today it is often used to mean "snobbish," "effeminate," or "unduly pampered." Because of its ambiguity, the word is best avoided altogether.

**effrontery; affront.** *Effrontery* is an act of shameless impudence or shocking audacity. An *affront* is a deliberate insult.

**e.g.** See *i.e.*

**either.** Like *neither*, this word takes a singular verb when it functions as subject {is either of the spouses present today?}.

**elemental; elementary.** Something that is *elemental* is an essential constituent {elemental ingredients} or a power of nature {elemental force}. Something that is *elementary* is basic, introductory, or easy {an elementary math problem}.

**elicit; illicit.** To *elicit* information or a reaction is to get it from someone, especially in challenging circumstances {to elicit responses}. Something *illicit* is disallowed by law or rule and usually also condemned generally by society {an illicit scheme}. Writers often mistakenly use the adjective *illicit* when they need the verb *elicit*.

**elude.** See *allude*.

**embarrass.** See *harass*.

**emend.** See *amend*.

**emigrate.** See *immigrate*.

**eminent; imminent.** What is *eminent* is famous, important, and respected {the eminent professor} or derives from high standing or authority {eminent domain}. What is *imminent* is looming, likely to happen soon, and almost always bad {imminent disaster}.

**emoji; emoticon.** An *emoji* (from the Japanese; pl. *emoji*) is a pictorial representation, or ideogram, that consists of a face, a hand gesture, or an object or symbol intended to express or suggest an emotion or attitude—or any number of ideas or things. An *emoticon* is a representation of a smiley face or other expressive gesture rendered as a combination of common keyboard characters—e.g., ;-).

**emotive; emotional.** The first means "arousing intense feeling" {emotive language calculated to persuade the jury}; the second means "of, relating to, or involving intense feelings" {an emotional response}.

**empathy; sympathy.** *Empathy* is the ability to understand other people's feelings and problems {tremendous empathy with others}. *Sympathy* is generally compassion and sorrow one feels for another's misfortunes, especially on a particular occasion {our sympathies are with you}—but it can also be support for a plan or idea {right-wing sympathies} or a mutual understanding and warmth arising from compatibility {there was no personal sympathy between them}.

**endemic.** See *epidemic*.

**endorse.** See *approve*.

**enerve; innervate.** These words are antonyms. To *enerve* is to weaken or drain of energy. To *innervate* is to stimulate or provide with energy.

**enormity; enormousness.** *Enormity* means "monstrousness, moral outrageousness, atrociousness" {the enormity of the Khmer Rouge's killings}. *Enormousness* means "hugeness" or "immensity" {the enormity of Alaska}.

**enough.** See *adequate*.

**enquire.** See *inquire*.

**ensure; insure; assure.** *Ensure* is the general term meaning "to make sure that something will (or won't) happen." In best usage, *insure* is reserved for underwriting financial risk. So we *ensure* that we can get time off for a vacation, and we *insure* our car against an accident on the trip. We *ensure* events and *insure* things. But we *assure* people of things by telling them what's what, so that they won't worry. The important thing to remember is that we ensure occurrences and assure people.

**enthused, adj.** Use *enthusiastic* instead.

**enumerable; innumerable.** What's *enumerable* is countable and listable {the enumerable issues that we need on the agenda}. What's *innumerable* can't be counted, at least not practically {innumerable stars in the sky}. The second word is far more common. Because the two are pronounced so similarly, be wary of using them in speech.

**envy.** See *jealousy*.

**epidemic; endemic; pandemic.** An *epidemic* disease breaks out, spreads through a limited area (such as a state), and then subsides {an epidemic outbreak of measles}. (The word is frequently used as a noun {a measles epidemic}.) An *endemic* disease is perennially present within a region or population {malaria is endemic in parts of Africa}. (Note that *endemic* describes a disease and not a region: it is incorrect to say *this region is endemic for* [a disease].) A *pandemic* disease is prevalent over a large area, such as a nation or continent, or the entire world {the 1918–19 flu pandemic}.

**equally as.** This is typically faulty phrasing. Delete *as*.

**et al.** This is the abbreviated form of *et alii* ("and others")—the *others* being people, not things. Since *al.* is an abbreviation, the period is required—but note that no period follows the *et* (Latin for "and"). Cf. *etc.*

**etc.** This is the abbreviated form of *et cetera* ("and other things"); it should never be used in reference to people. *Etc.* implies that a list of things is too extensive to recite. But often writers seem to run out of thoughts and tack on *etc.* for no real purpose. Also, two redundancies often appear with this abbreviation: (1) *and etc.*, which is poor style because *et* means "and," and (2) *etc.* at the end of a list that begins with *for example, such as, e.g.*, and the like. Those terms properly introduce a short list of examples. Cf. **et al.**; see also 6.20.

**event.** The phrase *in the event that* is a verbose and formal way of saying *if*.

**eventuality.** This term often needlessly displaces more specific everyday words such as *event, result*, and *possibility*.

**every day, adv.; everyday, adj.** The first is adverbial, the second adjectival. You may wear your *everyday* clothes *every day*.

**every one; everyone.** The two-word version is an emphatic way of saying "each" {every one of them was there}; the second is a pronoun equivalent to *everybody* {everyone was there}.

**everywhere.** This is the preferable word—not *everyplace*.

**evoke; invoke.** To *evoke* something is to bring it out {evoke laughter} or bring it to mind {evoke childhood memories}. *Invoke* has a number of senses, including to assert (something) as authority {invoke the Monroe Doctrine}, to appeal (to someone or a higher power) for help {invoke an ally to intervene}, and to conjure up {invoke spirits of the past}.

**exceptional; exceptionable.** What is *exceptional* is uncommon, superior, rare, or extraordinary {an exceptional talent}. What is *exceptionable* is objectionable or offensive {an exceptionable slur}.

**executor; administrator.** In a will, a person designates an *executor* to distribute the estate after death. When a person dies without a will or without specifying an executor, the court will appoint an *administrator* to do the same. The feminine forms *administratrix* and *executrix* are unnecessary and should be avoided.

**explicit; implicit.** If something is *explicit*, it is deliberately and clearly spelled out, as in the text of a well-drafted statute. If it is *implicit*, it is not specifically stated but is either suggested in the wording or necessary to effectuate the purpose. Avoid *implicit* to mean "complete, unmitigated."

**fact that, the.** This much-maligned phrase is not always avoidable. But hunt for a substitute before deciding to use it. Sometimes *that* alone suffices.

**farther; further.** The traditional distinction is to use *farther* for a physical distance {we drove farther north to see the autumn foliage} and *further* for a figurative distance {let's examine this further} {look no further}. Although it's a refinement of slight importance, connoisseurs will appreciate it.

**faze; phase, vb.** To *faze* is to disturb or disconcert {Jones isn't fazed by insults}. To *phase* (usually *phase in* or *phase out*) is to schedule or perform a plan, task, or the like in stages {phase in new procedures} {phase out the product lines that don't sell}. The negative adjective for "unaffected" is *unfazed*, not *unphased*.

**feel.** This verb is weak when used as a substitute for *think* or *believe*.

**feel bad.** Invariably, the needed phrase is *feel bad* (not *feel badly*). See 5.170.

**fewer.** See less.

**fictional; fictitious; fictive.** *Fictional* (from *fiction* as a literary genre) means "of, relating to, or involving imagination" {a fictional story}. *Fictitious* means "imaginary; counterfeit; false" {a fictitious name}. *Fictive* means "possessing the talent for imaginative creation" {fictive gift}; although it can also be a synonym for *fictional*, in that sense it is a needless variant. Also, anthropologists use *fictive* to describe relationships in which people are treated as family members despite having no bond of blood or marriage {fictive kin}.

**finalize.** Meaning "to bring to an end or finish the last part of," this word has

often been associated with inflated jargon. Although its compactness may recommend it in some contexts, use *finish* when possible.

**first.** In enumerations, use *first*, *second*, *third*, and so on. Avoid the *-ly* forms.

**fit.** This verb is undergoing a shift. It has traditionally been conjugated *fit-fitted-fitted*, but today *fit-fit-fit* is prevalent in American English {when she tried on the dress, it fit quite well}. In the passive voice, however, *fitted* is still normal {the horse was fitted with a new harness}.

**flagrant.** See **blatant**.

**flair.** See **flare**.

**flammable; inflammable.** *Flammable* was invented in the early twentieth century as an alternative to the synonymous word *inflammable*, which some people misunderstood—dangerously—as meaning "not combustible." Today *flammable* is the standard term. Its antonym is *nonflammable*.

**flare; flair.** A *flare* is an unsteady and glaring light {an emergency flare} or a sudden outburst {a flare-up of fighting}. A *flair* is an outstanding talent {a flair for mathematics} or originality and stylishness {performed with flair}.

**flaunt; flout.** *Flaunt* means "to show off ostentatiously" {they flaunted their wealth}. *Flout* means "to openly disobey" {they flouted the rules}.

**flounder; founder.** Although the figurative sense of both verbs is "to go wrong," the literal senses evoke different images. To *flounder* is to struggle awkwardly, as though walking through deep mud {the professor glared while the unprepared student floundered around for an answer}. To *founder* (usually in reference to a boat or ship) is to sink or run aground {the ship foundered on the rocks}.

**flout.** See **flaunt**.

**following.** Avoid this word as an equivalent of *after*. Consider the possible miscue in *Following the presentation, there was a question-and-answer session*. *After* is both simpler and clearer.

**forbear, vb.; forebear, n.** The terms are unrelated, but the spellings are frequently confused. To *forbear* is to refrain {he wanted to speak but decided to forbear [the conjugation is *forbear-forbore-forborne*]}. A *forebear* is an ancestor {the house was built by Murray's distant forebears}.

**forego; forgo.** To *forego* is to go before {the foregoing paragraph}. The word appears most commonly in the phrase *foregone conclusion*. To *forgo*, by contrast, is to do without or renounce {they decided to forgo that opportunity}.

**foreword; preface.** A book's *foreword* (not *forward*) is an introductory essay written by someone other than the book's author. An introductory essay written by the book's author is called a *preface*. See 1.40, 1.41, 1.43, 1.47.

**forgo.** See **forego**.

**former; latter.** In the best usage, these words apply only to pairs. The *former* is the first of two, the *latter* the second of two.

**fortuitous; fortunate.** *Fortuitous* means "happening by chance," usually (but not always) with a good result {the rotten tree could have fallen at any time; it was just fortuitous that the victims drove by when they did}. *Fortunate* means "lucky" {we were fortunate to win the raffle}. Today, unfortunately, *fortuitous* is poaching on the semantic turf of *fortunate*.

**forward(s).** See **toward**.

**founder.** See **flounder**.

**free rein.** So written—not *free reign*.

**fulsome, adj.** This word does not preferably mean "very full" but "too much, excessive to the point of being repulsive." Traditionally, a "fulsome speech" is one that is so overpacked with thanks or hyperbole as to sound insincere. The word's slipshod use arises most often in the cliché *fulsome praise*, which can suggest the opposite of what the writer probably intends.

**further.** See **farther**.

**future, in the near.** Use *soon* or *shortly* instead.

**gauntlet; gantlet.** Lexicographers and usage critics—especially American ones—have sought since the nineteenth century to make a distinction. Etymologically, the two words have different histories: throwing down the *gauntlet* (=glove) and running the *gantlope* (= ordeal). But *gauntlet* has taken over both meanings. The standard phrases have been *run the gauntlet* and *throw down the gauntlet* since about 1800—the former phrase by a 10-to-1 margin over the competing form *run the gantlet*. Efforts to separate the terms have run their grueling course.

**gentleman.** This word is a vulgarism when used as a synonym for *man*. When used in reference to a cultured, refined man, it is susceptible to some of the same objections as those leveled against *lady*. Use it cautiously. Cf. **lady**.

**get.** Though shunned by many writers as too casual, *get* often sounds more natural than *obtain* or *procure* {get a divorce}. It can also substitute for a stuffy *become* {get hurt}. The verb is conjugated *get-got-gotten* in American English and *get-got-got* in British English. *Get* is the only verb apart from *be*-verbs that, when coupled with a past participle, can create a passive-voice construction {get stolen} {get waylaid}.

**gibe; jibe; jive.** A *gibe* is a biting insult or taunt: *gibes* are figuratively thrown at their target {the angry crowd hurled *gibes* at the miscreant}. To *jibe* is to be in accord or to agree {the verdict didn't *jibe* with the judge's own view of the facts}. *Jive* can be either a noun (referring to swing music or to misleading talk that is transparently untrue) or a verb (meaning "to dance to such music" or "to try to mislead with lies").

**gild.** See **gild**.

**go.** This verb is conjugated *go-went-gone*. *Went* appears as a past participle only in dialect.

**gourmet; gourmand.** Both are aficionados of good food and drink. But a *gourmet* knows and appreciates the fine points of food and drink, whereas a *gourmand* tends toward gluttony.

**graduate, vb.** Whereas *graduate* means "to grant a diploma to or confer a degree

on," *graduate from* means "to receive a diploma or degree from (a school, university, or other institution)." A school can *graduate* a student or a student can *graduate from* a school, but a student does not *graduate* a school—at least not in good usage.

**grateful; gratified.** To be *grateful* is to be thankful or appreciative. To be *gratified* is to be pleased, satisfied, or indulged.

**grisly; grizzly.** What is *grisly* is gruesome or horrible {grisly details}. What is *grizzly* is grayish {grizzly hair} or bearish {the North American grizzly bear}.

**guild, n.; gild, vb.** A *guild* is an organization of persons with a common interest or profession {a guild of goldsmiths}. To *gild* is to put a thin layer of gold on something {gild a picture frame}, sometimes in a figurative sense {gilding the lily}.

**hail; hale.** To *hail* is to salute or greet {hail, Caesar!}, to acclaim enthusiastically {hailed as the greatest novelist of her time}, or to shout as an attention-getter {hail a taxi}. To *hale* is to compel to go {haled into court}. *Hail* is also a noun denoting ice-pellet precipitation, or something like it {a hail of insults}. *Hale* is also an adjective describing someone who is physically sound and free from infirmities.

**half (of).** Delete the *of* whenever possible {half the furniture}. When *half* is followed by a singular noun, the verb is singular {half the state is solidly Democratic}; when it is followed by a plural noun, the verb is plural {half the people are Republicans}.

**handful.** If *handful* applies to a mass noun, use a singular verb {a handful of trouble is ahead}. But if *handful* applies to a plural count noun, use a plural verb {only a handful of walnut trees still line Main Street}.

**hangar; hanger.** One finds *hangars* (large buildings where aircraft are kept) at an airport {airplane hangars}. Everywhere else, one finds *hangers* {clothes hangers} {picture hangers}.

**hanged; hung.** *Hanged* is used as the past participle of *hang* only in its transitive form when referring to the killing (just or unjust) of a human being by suspending the person by the neck {criminals were hanged at Tyburn Hill}. But if death is not intended or likely, or if the person is suspended by a body part other than the neck, *hung* is correct {he was hung upside down as a cruel prank}. In most senses, of course, *hung* is the past form of *hang* {Abdul hung up his clothes}.

**hanger.** See *hangar*.

**harass; embarrass.** The first word has one *r*; the second has two. The pronunciation of *harass* also causes confusion. The dominant American pronunciation stresses the second syllable, while British English stresses the first.

**harebrained.** So spelled (after the timid, easily startled animal)—not *hairbrained*.

**hark back.** So written—preferably not *harken back* or *hearken back*.

**healthy; healthful.** Traditionally, a living thing that is *healthy* enjoys good health; something that is *healthful* promotes health {a healthful diet will keep you healthy}. But gradually *healthy* is taking over both senses.

**help (to).** Omit the *to* when possible {talking will help resolve the problem}.

**he or she.** To avoid sexist language, many writers use this alternative phrasing (in place of the generic *he*). Use it sparingly—preferably after exhausting all other, less obtrusive methods of achieving gender neutrality. In any event, *he or she* is much preferable to *he/she, s/he, (s)he*, and the like. See also 5.48, 5.255.

**historic; historical.** The shorter word refers to what is momentous in history {January 16, 1991, was a historic day in Kuwait}. *Historical*, meanwhile, refers simply to anything that pertains to or occurred in history {the historical record}. On the question whether to use *a* or *an* before *historic* and *historical*, see *a*.

**hoard; horde.** A *hoard* is a supply, usually secret and sometimes valuable. *Hoard* is also a verb meaning "to amass such a supply," especially when there is no need to do so. A *horde* was originally a tribe of Asian nomads; today a *horde* is a large crowd, especially one that moves in a noisy, uncontrolled way.

**hoi polloi.** This is a mildly disparaging phrase for "common people." It does not refer to elites, though some writers and speakers misuse it in this way (perhaps from false association with *hoity-toity*). It is a plural. Although *hoi* is Greek for "the," the phrase is commonly rendered *the hoi polloi* and has been at least since it was used by John Dryden in 1668.

**holocaust.** When capitalized, this word refers to the Nazi genocide of European Jews in World War II. When not capitalized, it refers (literally or figuratively) to extensive devastation caused by fire or to the systematic and malicious killings of human beings on a vast scale. Avoid any light or hyperbolic use of this word.

**home in.** This phrase is frequently misrendered *hone in*. (*Hone* means "to sharpen.") *Home in* refers to what homing pigeons and aerial bombs do; the meaning is "to come closer and closer to a target."

**homicide.** See **murder**.

**hopefully.** The old meaning of the word ("in a hopeful manner") seems unsustainable; the newer meaning ("I hope" or "it is to be hoped that"), as a sentence adverb, spread in the 1960s and 1970s and seems here to stay. But many careful writers still deplore the new meaning.

**horde.** See **hoard**.

**humanitarian.** This word means "involving the promotion of human welfare" {humanitarian philanthropy}. Avoid using it in a phrase such as *the worst humanitarian disaster in decades*, where it really means just "human."

**hung.** See **hanged**.

**I; me.** When you need a first-person pronoun, use one. It's not immodest to do so; it's superstitious not to. But be sure you get the right one {Sally and I are planning to go} {give John or me a call} {keep this between you and me}. See **between you and me**.

**idyllic.** An *idyll* is a short pastoral poem, and by extension *idyllic* means charming or picturesque. It is not synonymous with *ideal* (perfect).

**i.e.; e.g.** The first is the abbreviation for *id est* ("that is"); the second is the abbreviation for *exempli gratia* ("for example"). The English equivalents are preferable in formal prose, though sometimes the compactness of these two-character abbreviations makes them desirable. Always put a comma after either one. See also 6.20, 6.51.

**if; whether.** While *if* is conditional, *whether* introduces an alternative, often in the context of an indirect question. Use *whether* in two circumstances: (1) to introduce a noun clause: *he asked whether his tie was straight* (the alternatives are *yes* and *no*), and (2) when using *if* produces ambiguity. In the sentence *he asked if his tie was straight*, the literal meaning is "whenever his tie was straight, he asked"; the popular meaning "he wanted someone to tell him whether his tie did or didn't need straightening" may not be understood by all readers. More tellingly, *Call to let me know if you can come* means that you should call only if you're coming. *Call to let me know whether you can come* means that you should call regardless of whether the answer is yes or no. Avoid substituting *if* for *whether* unless your tone is intentionally informal or you are quoting someone. See **determine whether; whether**.

**ilk.** This noun commonly means "type" or "sort" in modern usage, and unobjectionably so today {of his ilk} {of that ilk}. The Scottish phrase *of that ilk* means "of the same name or place."

**illegal.** See **unlawful**.

**illegible; unreadable.** Handwriting or printing that is *illegible* is not clear enough to be read {illegible scrawlings}. Writing that is *unreadable* is so poorly composed as to be either incomprehensible or intolerably dull.

**illicit.** See **elicit; unlawful**.

**illude.** See **allude**.

**immigrate; emigrate.** To *immigrate* is to enter a country to live permanently, leaving a past home. To *emigrate* is to leave one country to live in another one. The cognate forms also demand attention. Someone who moves from Ireland to the United States is an *immigrant* here and an *emigrant* there. An *émigré* is also an *emigrant*, but especially one in political exile.

**imminent.** See **eminent**.

**impact; impactful.** Resist using *impact* as a verb. Try *affect* or *influence* instead. Besides being hyperbolic, *impact* is still considered a solecism by traditionalists (though it is gaining ground). Avoid *impactful*, which is jargon (replacements include *influential* and *powerful*). Cf. **access**.

**impeachment.** *Impeachment* is the legislative equivalent of an indictment, not a conviction. In the US federal system, the House of Representatives votes on impeachment, and the Senate votes on removal from office.

**impelled.** See **compelled**.

**implicit.** See **explicit**.

**imply; infer.** The writer or speaker *implies* (hints, suggests); the reader or listener *infers* (deduces). Writers and speakers often use *infer* as if it were synonymous with *imply*, but careful writers always distinguish between the two words. See *inference*.

**important; importantly.** In the phrase *more important(ly)*—usually at the outset of a sentence—traditionalists prefer the shorter form as an ellipsis of *what is more important*, normally with a comma following. But *more importantly* is now established as a sentence adverb—and it's unobjectionable.

**impractical; impracticable.** The first is the more general adjective, meaning "not sensible" or "unrealistic" {impractical planning that doesn't account for travel expenses}. The second means "impossible to carry out" {landing aircraft on that hole-ridden runway proved impracticable}. See also *practicable*.

**in actual fact.** See *actual fact*, *in*.

**inasmuch as.** *Because* or *since* is almost always a better choice. See *since*.

**in behalf of.** See *behalf*.

**incidence; incident; instance.** Be careful with the first of these words: it has to do with relative rates and ranges {the incidence of albinism within a given society}. Perhaps leave it to scientists and actuaries. An *incident* (= an event, occurrence, or happening) should be distinguished from an *instance* (= a case, example).

**include; comprise.** The basic difference between these near-synonyms is that *include* implies nonexclusivity {the collection includes 126 portraits [suggesting that there is much else in the collection]}, while *comprise* implies exclusivity {the collection comprises 126 silver spoons [suggesting that nothing else is part of the collection]}. Oddly, in patent law—and there alone—*comprise* carries a nonexclusive sense. See *comprise*.

**in connection with.** This is a vague, fuzzy phrase {she explained the financial consequences in connection with the transaction} {Ray liked everything in connection with golf} {Phipson was compensated in connection with its report}. Try replacing the phrase with *of*, *related to*, or *associated with* {she explained the financial consequences of the transaction}, *about* {Ray liked everything about golf}, or *for* {Phipson was compensated for its report}.

**incredible; incredulous.** *Incredible* properly means "too strange to be believed; difficult to believe." Colloquially, it is used to mean "astonishingly good" {it was an incredible trip}. *Incredulous* means "disbelieving, skeptical" {people are incredulous about the rising gas costs}.

**inculcate; indoctrinate.** One *inculcates* values *into* a child but *indoctrinates* the child *with* values. That is, *inculcate* always takes the preposition *into* and a value or values as its object {inculcate courage into soldiers}. *Indoctrinate* takes a person as its object {indoctrinate children with the habit of telling the truth}.

**individual.** Use this word to distinguish a single person from a group. When possible, use a more specific term, such as *person*, *adult*, *child*, *man*, or *woman*.

**indoctrinate.** See *inculcate*.

**induce.** See **adduce**.

**in excess of.** Try replacing this verbose phrase with *more than* or *over*. See **over**.

**infectious.** See **contagious**.

**infer.** See **imply**.

**inference.** Use the verb *draw*, not *make*, with *inference* {they drew the wrong inferences}. Otherwise readers may confuse *inference* with *implication*. See **imply**.

**inflammable.** See **flammable**.

**inflct; afflict.** Events, illnesses, punishments, etc. are *inflicted on* living things or entities {an abuser inflicts cruelty}. The sufferers are *afflicted with* or *by* disease, troubles, etc. {agricultural communities are afflicted with drought}.

**ingenious; ingenuous.** These words are similar in form but not in meaning. *Ingenious* describes what is intelligent, clever, and original {an ingenious invention}. *Ingenuous* describes a person who is candid, naive, and without dissimulation, or an action or statement with those qualities {a hurtful but ingenuous observation}.

**innate; inherent.** An *innate* characteristic is one that a living thing has from birth; it should be distinguished, then, from a talent or disposition that one acquires from training or experience. An *inherent* characteristic is also part of a thing's nature, but life is not implied. A rock, for example, has an inherent hardness.

**innervate.** See **enervate**.

**innocent; not guilty.** If you are *innocent*, you are without blame. If you are *not guilty*, you have been exonerated by a jury. Newspapers avoid the *not guilty* phrase, though, because the consequences of accidentally leaving off the *not* could be serious. See **pleaded**.

**innumerable.** See **enumerable**.

**in order to; in order for.** Often these expressions can be reduced to *to* and *for*. When that is so, and rhythm and euphony are preserved or even heightened, use *to* or *for*.

**in proximity.** See **close proximity**.

**inquire.** The normal spellings in American English and British English alike are *inquire* and *inquiry*. *Enquire* and *enquiry* are primarily British English variants.

**in regard to.** This is the phrase, not the nonstandard *in regards to*. But try a single-word substitute instead: *about, regarding, concerning*, etc.

**insidious; invidious.** What is *insidious* spreads gradually to cause damage—at first without being noticed {an insidious conspiracy}; what is *invidious* involves moral offensiveness and serious unpleasantness {invidious discrimination}.

**in spite of.** See **despite**.

**instance.** See **incidence**.

**insure.** See **ensure**.

**intense; intensive.** *Intense* means (1) "having a strong effect" {intense pressures}, (2) "involving a great deal of effort during a very short time" {intense concentration}, or (3) "having unduly strong feelings or a demeanor of exaggerated

seriousness" {he's a bit too intense}. *Intense* is always preferred outside philosophical and scientific usages. But *intensive* should be retained in customary terms such as *labor-intensive* and *intensive care*.

**intently; intensely.** An act done *intently* is done purposefully and with concentration and determination. One that is done *intensely* is done with great power, passion, or emotion but not necessarily with deliberate intent.

**inter; intern.** *Inter* is a verb meaning "to bury (a dead person)"; the corresponding noun is *interment*. An *intern* is a student working temporarily to gain experience, especially in a profession. *Intern* is also a verb with two senses. As an intransitive verb, it means "to work as an intern" {interning at the US Senate}; the corresponding noun is *internship*. As a transitive verb, it means "to confine (a civilian) to a certain place or district without a criminal charge, especially in wartime or for political reasons"; the corresponding noun is *internment*.

**in the affirmative.** See **affirmative, in the.**

**in the event that.** See **event.**

**in the near future.** See **future, in the near.**

**in the negative.** See **affirmative, in the.**

**inveigh; inveigle.** To *inveigh* is to protest, usually against something {picketers inveighed against annexation}. To *inveigle* is to cajole or ensnare, especially by misleading {inveigling a friend to attend the party}.

**invidious.** See **insidious.**

**invoke.** See **evoke.**

**irregardless.** An error. Use *regardless* (or possibly *irrespective*).

**it is I; it is me.** Both are correct and acceptable. The first phrase, using the first-person predicate nominative, is strictly grammatical (and a little stuffy); the second is idiomatic (and relaxed), and it is often contracted to *it's me*. In third-person constructions, however, a greater stringency holds sway in good English {this is he} {it isn't she who has caused such misery}.

**its; it's.** *Its* is the possessive form of *it*; *it's* is the contraction for *it is* {it's a sad dog that scratches its fleas}.

**jealousy; envy.** *Jealousy* connotes feelings of resentment toward another, particularly in matters relating to an intimate relationship {sexual jealousy}. *Envy* refers to coveting another's advantages, possessions, or abilities {his transparent envy of others' successes}.

**jibe; jive.** See **gibe.**

**karat.** See **carat.**

**kudos.** Preferably pronounced /k[y]oo-dos/ (not /-dohz/), this word means "praise and admiration." It is singular, not plural. Hence avoid *kudo is* or *kudos are*.

**lady.** When used as a synonym for *woman*—indeed, when used anywhere but in the phrase *ladies and gentlemen*—this word will be considered objectionable by some readers who think that it refers to a patronizing stereotype. This is especially true when it is used for unprestigious jobs {cleaning lady} or as a

condescending adjective {lady lawyer}. Some will insist on using it to describe a refined woman. If they've consulted this entry, they've been forewarned. Cf. **gentleman**.

**last; lastly.** As with *first*, *second*, etc., prefer *last* when introducing a final point of discussion—or (of course) *finally*.

**latter.** See **former**.

**laudable; laudatory.** *Laudable* means "praiseworthy, even if not fully successful" {a laudable effort}. *Laudatory* means "expressing praise" {laudatory phone calls}.

**lay; lie.** Admittedly, the traditional conjugations are more blurred than ever. Mastering them has proved difficult for people. Nevertheless, here goes. *Lay* is a transitive verb—that is, it demands a direct object {lay your pencils down}. It is inflected *lay-laid-laid* {I laid the book there yesterday} {these rumors have been laid to rest}. (The children's prayer *Now I lay me down to sleep* is a good mnemonic device for the transitive *lay*.) *Lie* is an intransitive verb—that is, it never takes a direct object {lie down and rest}. It is inflected *lie-lay-lain* {she lay down and rested} {he hasn't yet lain down in twenty-three hours}. In a doctor's office, you should be asked to *lie back* or *lie down*.

**leach; leech.** To *leach* is to percolate or to separate out solids in solution by percolation. A *leech* is a bloodsucker (whether literal or figurative). By extension of that noun, to *leech* is either to attach oneself to another as a leech does or to drain the resources of something.

**lead.** See **led**.

**lease; let.** Many Americans seem to think that *let* is colloquial and of modern origin. In fact, the word is three hundred years older than *lease* and just as proper. One distinction between the two words is that either the owner or the tenant can be said to *lease* property, but only the owner can be said to *let* it.

**led.** This is the correct spelling of the past tense and past participle of the verb *lead*. It is often misspelled *lead*, maybe in part because of the pronunciation of the metal *lead* and the past tense and past participle *read*, both of which rhyme with *led*.

**leech.** See **leach**.

**lend, vb.; loan, vb. & n.** *Lend* is the correct term for letting someone use something with the understanding that it (or its equivalent) will be returned. The verb *loan* is standard especially when money is the subject of the transaction—but even then, *lend* appears somewhat more frequently in edited English. *Loan* is the noun corresponding to both *lend* and *loan*, vb. The past-tense and past-participial form of *lend* is *lent*.

**less; fewer.** Reserve *less* for singular mass nouns or amounts {less salt} {less soil} {less water}. Reserve *fewer* for plural count nouns {fewer calories} {fewer people} {fewer suggestions}.

**lest.** This is one of the few English words that invariably call for a verb in the subjunctive mood {he didn't want to drive lest he take a wrong turn} {he has

turned down the volume lest he disturb his roommates}. The conjunction is somewhat more common in British English than in American English.

**let.** See *lease*.

**libel.** See *defamation*.

**lie.** See *lay*.

**life-and-death; life-or-death.** The problem of logic aside (life and death being mutually exclusive), the first phrase is the standard idiom {a life-and-death decision}.

**light, vb.** This verb can be inflected either *light-lit-lit* or *light-lighted-lighted*—and irreproachably so. The past-participial adjective tends to be *lighted* when not modified by an *-ly* adverb {a lighted building} {a well-lighted hall} but *lit* if an *-ly* adverb precedes {brightly lit sconces} {a nicely lit walkway}.

**like; as.** The use of *like* as a conjunction (as in the old jingle "tastes good like a cigarette should") has long been a contentious issue. Traditionally speaking, *like* is a preposition, not a conjunction equivalent to *as* {you're much like me [*me* is the object of the preposition *like*] }{do as I say [the conjunction *as* connects the imperative *do* with the independent clause *I say*]}. As a casualism, however, the conjunctive *like* has become especially common since the mid-twentieth century {nobody cares like I do} {it tastes good like a fine chocolate should}. In Standard Written English, a conjunctive *like* will still provoke frowns among some readers. But the objections are slowly dwindling. If you want your prose to be unimpeachable and heightened, stick to *as* and *as if* for conjunctive senses {as we've observed, man is a social animal} {it looks as if it might rain}. See also 5.185.

**likely.** See *apt*.

**literally.** This word means "actually; without exaggeration." It should not be used loosely in figurative senses, as in *they were literally glued to their seats* (unless glue had in fact been applied). Wherever guides have accepted this usage, they should be disregarded.

**loan.** See *lend*.

**loathe, vb.; loath, adj.** To *loathe* (the *th* pronounced as in *that*) something is to detest it intensely or to regard it with disgust {I loathe tabloid television}. Someone who is *loath* (the *th* pronounced as in *thing*) is reluctant or unwilling {Tracy seems loath to admit mistakes}.

**lose; loose, vb.; loosen.** To *lose* something is to be deprived of it. To *loose* something is to release it from fastenings or restraints. To *loosen* is to make less tight or to ease a restraint. *Loose* conveys the idea of complete release, whereas *loosen* refers to only a partial release.

**lot.** See *a lot*.

**luxuriant; luxurious.** The two terms are fairly often confused (an example of catachresis). What is *luxuriant* is lush and grows abundantly {a luxuriant head of hair}. What is *luxurious* is lavish, extravagant, and comfortable {a luxurious resort}.

**mad; angry.** Some people object to using *mad* to mean "angry" and would reserve it to mean "insane." But the first sense dates back seven hundred years and isn't likely to disappear. As common as it is in everyday use, though, it has been so stigmatized that most people avoid it in formal writing.

**majority.** This noun preferably denotes countable things {a majority of votes cast}, not uncountable ones {the majority of the time}. Use *most* whenever it fits. When referring to a preponderance of votes cast, *majority* takes a singular verb {her majority was 7 percent}. But referring to a predominant group of people or things, it can take either a singular verb {the majority in the House was soon swept away} or a plural one {the majority of the voters were against the proposal}. Typically, if a genitive with a plural object follows *majority*, the verb should be plural {a majority of music teachers prefer using the metronome}.

**malevolent; maleficent.** *Malevolent* describes an evil mind that wishes to harm others {with malevolent intent}. *Maleficent* is similar but describes desire by the miscreant for accomplishing evil {maleficent bullying}.

**malodorous.** See *odious*.

**maltreatment.** See *mistreatment*.

**mankind.** Consider *humankind* instead.

**manslaughter.** See *murder*.

**mantle; mantel.** A *mantle* is a long, loose garment like a cloak—almost always today being used in a metaphorical sense {assuming the mantle of a martyr}.

A *mantel* is a wood or stone structure around a fireplace {family pictures on the mantel}.

**masterful; masterly.** *Masterful* describes a person who is dominating and imperious. *Masterly* describes a person who has mastered a craft, trade, or profession, or a product of such mastery; the word often means "authoritative" {a masterly analysis}. Because *masterly* does not readily make an adverb (*masterlily* being extremely awkward), try *in a masterly way*. See also 5.158.

**may; can.** See *can*.

**may; might.** *May* expresses what is possible, is factual, or could be factual {I may have turned off the stove, but I can't recall doing it}. *Might* suggests something that is uncertain, hypothetical, or contrary to fact {I might have won the marathon if I had entered}. See 5.147.

**me.** See *I*.

**medal; meddle; metal; mettle.** A *medal* is an award for merit; a *metal* is a type of substance, usually hard and heavy. To *meddle* is to interfere. And *mettle* is a person's character, courage, and determination to do something no matter how difficult.

**media; mediums.** In scientific contexts and in reference to mass communications, the plural of *medium* is predominantly *media* {some bacteria flourish in several types of media} {the media are reporting more medical news}. Although one frequently sees *media is*, the plural use is recommended. If

*medium* refers to a spiritualist, the plural is *mediums* {several mediums have held séances here}.

**memoranda; memorandums.** Although both plural forms are correct, *memoranda* has predominated since the early nineteenth century. Don't use *memoranda* as if it were singular—the word is *memorandum* {this memorandum is} {these memoranda are}.

**metal; mettle.** See **medal**.

**mete out.** The phrase meaning "to distribute" or "to assign" is so spelled {mete out punishment}. *Meet out* is a common error, especially in the erroneous past tense *meeted out*.

**might.** See **may**.

**militate.** See **mitigate**.

**minuscule.** Something that is minuscule is "very small." Probably because of the spelling of the modern word *mini* (and the prefix of the same spelling, which is recorded only from 1936), it is often misspelled *miniscule*. In printing, *minuscules* are lowercase letters and *majuscules* are capital (uppercase) letters.

**mistreatment; maltreatment.** *Mistreatment* is the more general term. *Maltreatment* denotes a harsh form of mistreatment, involving abuse by rough or cruel handling.

**mitigate; militate.** To *mitigate* is to lessen or soften the effects of something unpleasant, harmful, or serious; *mitigating circumstances* lessen the seriousness of a crime. To *militate*, by contrast, is to have a marked effect on; the word is usually followed by *against* {his nearsightedness militated against his ambition to become a commercial pilot}. Avoid the mistaken phrase *mitigate against* for the correct *militate against*.

**moot; mute.** *Moot* (/moot/) means (traditionally) "debatable" {a moot point worth our attention} or (by modern extension) "having no practical significance" {a moot question that is of no account}. *Mute* (/m[y]oot/) means "silent, speechless"—and is often considered offensive when used as a noun {deaf-mute}.

**more than.** See **over**.

**much; very.** *Much* generally intensifies past-participial adjectives {much obliged} {much encouraged} and some comparatives {much more} {much worse} {much too soon}. *Very* intensifies adverbs and most adjectives {very carefully} {very bad}, including past-participial adjectives that have more adjectival than verbal force {very bored}. See 5.90.

**murder; manslaughter; homicide.** All three words denote the killing of one person by another. *Murder* and *manslaughter* are both unlawful killings, but *murder* is done maliciously and intentionally. *Homicide* includes killings that are not unlawful, such as by a police officer acting properly in the line of duty. *Homicide* also refers to a person who kills another.

**mute.** See **moot**.

**mutual.** See **common**.

**myself.** Avoid using *myself* as a pronoun in place of *I* or *me*—a quirk that arises most often after an *and* or *or*. Instead, use it reflexively {I did myself a favor} or emphatically {I myself have tried to get through that book!}. See also 5.51.

**naturalist; naturist.** *Naturalist* most often denotes a person who studies natural history, especially a field biologist or an amateur who observes and usually photographs, sketches, or writes about nature. *Naturist* denotes a nature worshipper or a nudist.

**nauseous; nauseated.** Whatever is *nauseous*, traditionally speaking, induces a feeling of nausea—it makes us feel sick to our stomachs. To feel sick is to be *nauseated*. Although the use of *nauseous* to mean *nauseated* may be too common to be called an error anymore, strictly speaking it is poor usage. Because of the ambiguity in *nauseous*, the wisest course may be to stick to the participial adjectives *nauseated* and *nauseating*.

**necessary; necessitous.** *Necessary* means "required under the circumstances" {the necessary arrangements}. *Necessitous* means "impoverished" {living in necessitous circumstances}.

**neither.** Four points. First, like *either*, this word when functioning as the subject of a clause takes a singular verb {neither of the subjects was given that medicine}. Second, a *neither-nor* construction should frame grammatically parallel expressions {neither the room's being too cold nor the heater's malfunction could justify his boorish reaction} (both noun elements). Third, a simple *neither-nor* construction should have only two elements {neither bricks nor stones}—though it's perfectly permissible to multiply *nors* for emphasis {neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night}. Fourth, the word is acceptably pronounced either /nee-thər/ or /nɪ-thər/.

**no.** See **affirmative, in the**.

**noisome.** This word has nothing to do with *noise*. It means noxious, offensive, or foul-smelling {a noisome landfill}.

**none.** This word may take either a singular or a plural verb. A guideline: if it is followed by a singular noun, treat it as a singular {none of the building was painted}; if by a plural noun, treat it as a plural {none of the guests were here when I arrived}. But for special emphasis, it is quite proper (though possibly stilted) to use a singular verb when a plural noun follows {none of my suggestions was accepted}.

**nonplussed.** Traditionally meaning "surprised and confused" {she was nonplussed when he took off the mask}, this word is now frequently misused to mean "unfazed"—almost the opposite of its literary sense. Avoid this newer usage, and avoid the variant spelling *nonplused*. See **faze**.

**notable; noticeable; noteworthy.** *Notable* (= readily noticed) applies both to physical things and to qualities {notable sense of humor}. *Noticeable* means "detectable with the physical senses" {a noticeable limp}. *Noteworthy* means "remarkable; deserving attention" {a noteworthy act of kindness}.

**not guilty.** See **innocent**.

**notwithstanding.** One word. Less formal alternatives include *despite*, *although*, and *in spite of*. The word *notwithstanding* may precede or follow a noun {notwithstanding her bad health, she decided to run for office} {her bad health notwithstanding, she decided to run for office}.

**number.** See **amount**.

**observance; observation.** *Observance* means "obedience to a rule or custom" {the family's observance of Passover}. *Observation* means either "the watching of something" or "a remark based on watching or studying something" {a keen observation about the defense strategy}. Each term is sometimes used when the other would be the better word.

**obtain.** See **attain**.

**obtuse; abstruse.** *Obtuse* describes a person who can't understand; *abstruse* describes an idea that is hard to understand. A person who is *obtuse* is dull and, by extension, dull-witted. What is *abstruse* is incomprehensible or nearly so.

**odious; odorous; odoriferous; malodorous.** *Odious* means "hateful" or "extremely unpleasant" {odious Jim Crow laws}. It is not related to the other terms, but it is sometimes misused as if it were. *Odorous* means "detectable by smell (for better or worse)" {odorous gases}. *Odoriferous* means essentially the same thing: it has meant "fragrant" as often as it has meant "foul." *Malodorous* means "smelling quite bad." The mistaken form *odiferous* is often used as a jocular equivalent of *smelly*—but most dictionaries don't record it.

**of.** Avoid using this word needlessly after *all*, *off*, *inside*, and *outside*. Also, prefer *June 2015* over *June of 2015*. To improve your style, try removing every *of*-phrase that you reasonably can.

**off.** Never put *of* after this word {we got off the bus}.

**officious.** A person who is *officious* is aggressively nosy and meddlesome—and overeager to tell people what to do. The word has nothing to do with *officer* and should not be confused with *official*.

**on; upon.** Prefer *on* to *upon* unless introducing an event or condition {put that on the shelf, please} {upon the job's completion, you'll get paid}. For more about *on*, see **onto**.

**on behalf of.** See **behalf**.

**one another.** See **each other**.

**oneself.** One word—not *one's self*.

**onto; on to; on.** When is *on* a preposition, and when an adverb? The sense of the sentence should tell, but the distinction can be subtle. *Onto* implies a movement, so it has an adverbial flavor even though it is a preposition {the gymnast jumped onto the bars}. When *on* is part of the verb phrase, it is an adverb and *to* is the preposition {the gymnast held on to the bars}. One trick is to mentally say "up" before *on*: if the sentence still makes sense, then *onto* is probably the right choice {she leaped onto the capstone}. Alone, *on* does not imply motion {the gymnast is good on the parallel bars}.

**oppress; repress.** *Oppress*, meaning "to persecute or tyrannize," is more negative than *repress*, meaning "to restrain or subordinate."

**or.** If this conjunction joins singular nouns functioning as subjects, the verb should be singular {cash or online payment is acceptable}.

**oral.** See **verbal**.

**oration.** See **peroration**.

**ordinance; ordnance.** An *ordinance* is a municipal regulation or an authoritative decree. *Ordnance* is military armament, especially artillery but also weapons and ammunition generally.

**orient; orientate.** To *orient* is to get one's bearings (literally, "to find east") {it took the new employee a few days to get oriented to the firm's suite}. Unless used in the sense "to face or turn to the east," *orientate* is a poor variation to be avoided.

**ought; should.** Both express a sense of duty, but *ought* is stronger. Unlike *should*, *ought* requires a fully expressed infinitive, even in the negative {you ought not to see the movie}. Don't omit the *to*—as many otherwise well-educated speakers and writers have begun doing in recent years. See 5.149, 5.150.

**outside.** In spatial references, no *of* is necessary—or desirable—after this word unless it is used as a noun {outside the shop} {the outside of the building}. But *outside of* is acceptable as a colloquialism meaning "except for" or "aside from."

**over.** As an equivalent of *more than*, this word is perfectly good idiomatic English.

**overly.** Avoid this word, which is not considered the best usage. Try *over-* as a prefix {overprotective} or *unduly* {unduly protective}.

**pair.** This is a singular form, the plural being *pairs* {three pairs of shoes}. Yet *pair* may take either a singular verb {this pair of sunglasses was on the table} or a plural one {the pair were inseparable from the moment they met}.

**palette; palate; pallet.** An artist's *palette* is either the board that an artist uses for mixing colors or (collectively) the colors used by a particular artist or available in a computer program. Your *palate* is the roof of your mouth specifically or your taste in food generally. A *pallet* is a low, usually wooden platform for storing and transporting goods in commerce, or a crude bed consisting of a bag filled with straw.

**pandemic.** See **epidemic**.

**parameters.** Though it may sound elegant or scientific, this word is usually just pretentious when it is used in nontechnical contexts. Stick to *boundaries*, *limits*, *guidelines*, *grounds*, *elements*, or some other word.

**partake in; partake of.** To *partake in* is to participate in {the new student refused to partake in class discussions}. To *partake of* is either to get a part of {partake of the banquet} or to have a quality, at least to some extent {this assault partakes of revenge}.

**partly; partially.** Both words convey the sense "to some extent; in part" {partly responsible}. *Partly* is preferred in that sense. But *partially* has the additional senses of "incompletely" {partially cooked} and "unfairly; in a way that shows bias toward one side" {he treats his friends partially}.

**past; passed.** *Past* can be an adjective {past events} (often postpositive {times past}), a noun {remember the past}, a preposition {go past the school}, or an adverb {time flew past}. *Passed* is the past tense and past participle of the verb *pass* {we passed the school} {as time passed}.

**pastime.** This word combines *pass* (not *past*) and *time*. It is spelled with a single *s* and a single *t*.

**peaceable; peaceful.** A *peaceable* person or nation is inclined to avoid strife {peaceable kingdom}. A *peaceful* person, place, or event is serene, tranquil, and calm {a peaceful day free from demands}.

**peak; peek; pique.** These three sometimes get switched through writerly blunders. A *peak* is an apex, a *peek* is a quick or illicit glance, and a fit of *pique* is an episode of peevishness and wounded vanity. To *pique* is to annoy or arouse: an article *piques* (not *peaks*) one's interest.

**pedal; peddle.** *Pedal* is a noun, verb, or adjective relating to the pedal extremity, or foot. As a noun, it denotes a device that is operated by the foot and does some work, such as powering a bicycle or changing the sound of a piano. As a verb, it means to use such a device. As an adjective, it means "of or concerning such a device or its use." *Peddle* is a verb meaning either "to try to sell goods to people by traveling from place to place" or "to sell questionable goods to people"—questionable because they may be illegal, harmful, or low quality {peddling magazine subscriptions door to door}.

**peek.** See **peak**.

**pendant, n.; pendent, adj.** A *pendant* is an item of dangling jewelry, especially one worn around the neck. What is *pendent* is hanging or suspended from something.

**penultimate.** This adjective means "next to last" {the penultimate paragraph in the précis}. Many people have started misusing it as a fancy equivalent of *ultimate*. The word *antepenultimate* means "the next to the next-to-last."

**people; persons.** The traditional view is that *persons* is used for smaller numbers {three persons} and *people* with larger ones {millions of people}. But today most people use *people* even for small groups {only three people were there}.

**peroration; oration.** A *peroration*, strictly speaking, is the conclusion of an *oration* (speech). Careful writers avoid using *peroration* to refer to a rousing speech or piece of writing.

**perpetuate; perpetrate.** To *perpetuate* something is to sustain it or prolong it indefinitely {perpetuate the species}. To *perpetrate* is to commit or perform an act, especially one that is illegal or morally wrong {perpetrate a crime}.

**personally.** Three points. First, use this word only when someone does something that would normally be done through an agent {the president personally signed this invitation} or to limit other considerations {Jean was affected by

the decision but was not personally involved in it}. Second, *personally* is redundant when it modifies a verb that necessarily requires the person's presence, as in *The senator personally shook hands with the constituents*. Third, *personally* shouldn't appear with *I* when one is stating an opinion; it weakens the statement and doesn't reduce the speaker's liability for the opinion. The only exception arises if a person is required to advance someone else's view but holds a different personal opinion {in the chamber I voted to lower taxes because of the constituencies I represented; but I personally believed that taxes should have been increased}.

**persons.** See **people**.

**persuade; convince.** *Persuade* is associated with actions {persuade him to buy a suit}. *Convince* is associated with beliefs or understandings {she convinced the auditor of her honesty}. The phrase *persuade to (do)* has traditionally been considered better than *convince to (do)*—the latter having become common in American English in the 1950s. But either verb will take a *that*-clause {the committee was persuaded that an all-night session was necessary} {my three-year-old is convinced that Santa Claus exists}.

**pertain; appertain.** *Pertain to*, the more common term, means "to relate directly to" {the clause pertains to assignment of risk}. *Appertain to* means "to belong to or concern something as a matter of form or function" {the defendant's rights appertain to the Fifth Amendment}.

**peruse.** This term, which means "to read with great care" (*not* "to read quickly" or "to scan") should not be used as a fancy substitute for *read*.

**phase.** See **faze**.

**phenomenon.** This is the singular {the phenomenon of texting}, the plural being *phenomena* {cultural phenomena}.

**pique.** See **peak**.

**pitiably; pitiful.** To be *pitiably* is to be worthy of pity. To be *pitiful* is either to be very poor in quality or to be so sad or unfortunate as to make people feel sympathy.

**pleaded; pled.** The first is the standard past-tense and past-participial form {he pleaded guilty} {they have pleaded with their families}. Avoid *pled*.

**plethora.** This noun denotes an excess, surfeit, or overabundance. Avoid it as a mere equivalent of "abundance."

**populace; populous.** The *populace* is the population of a country as a whole. A *populous* place is densely populated.

**pore.** To *pore over* something written is to read it intently {they pored over every word in the report}. Some writers confuse this word with *pour*.

**practicable; possible; practical.** These terms differ in shading. What is *practicable* is capable of being done; it's feasible. What is *possible* might be capable of happening or being done, but there is some doubt. What is *practical* is fit for actual use or in a particular situation. See also **impractical**.

**precede; proceed.** To *precede* is to happen before or to go before in some se-

quence, usually time. It also means "to outrank" or "to surpass" in some measure such as importance, but this sense is usually conveyed with the noun *precedence* {the board's vote takes precedence over the staff's recommendation}. The word is often misspelled *preceed*. To *proceed* is to go on; whether beginning, continuing, or resuming.

**precipitate, adj.; precipitous.** What is *precipitate* occurs suddenly or rashly, without proper consideration; it describes demands, actions, or movements. What is *precipitous* is dangerously steep; it describes cliffs and inclines.

**precondition.** Try *condition* or *prerequisite* instead.

**predominant, adj.; predominate, vb.** Like *dominant*, *predominant* is an adjective {a predominant point of view}. Like *dominate*, *predominate* is a verb {a point of view that predominates throughout the state}. Using *predominate* as an adjective is nonstandard.

**preface.** See *foreword*.

**prejudice, vb.** Although *prejudice* is a perfectly normal English noun to denote an all-too-common trait, the corresponding verb is a legalism. For a plain-English equivalent, use *harm* or *hurt*. But the past-participial adjective *prejudiced* is perfectly normal in the sense "biased; harboring strong and often unfair feelings against."

**preliminary to.** Make it *before*, *in preparing for*, or some other natural phrasing.

**prescribe.** See *proscribe*.

**presently.** This word is ambiguous. Write *now* or *soon*, whichever you really mean.

**presumption.** See *assumption*.

**preventive.** Although the corrupt form *preventative* is fairly common, the strictly correct form is *preventive*.

**previous to.** Make it *before*.

**principle; principal.** A *principle* is a natural, moral, or legal rule {the principle of free speech}. The corresponding adjective is *principled* {a principled decision}. A *principal* is a person of high authority or prominence {a school principal} or an initial deposit of money {principal and interest}. *Principal* is also an adjective meaning "most important." Hence a *principal* role is a primary one.

**prior to.** Make it *before* or *until*.

**proceed.** See *precede*.

**process of, in the.** You can almost always delete this phrase without affecting the meaning.

**propaganda.** This is a singular noun denoting information that, being false or misleading, is used by a government or political group to influence people {propaganda was everywhere}. The plural is *propagandas*.

**prophesy; prophecy.** *Prophesy* is the verb meaning "to say what will happen in the future, especially by using supernatural or magical knowledge" {the doomsayers prophesied a market boom despite the bad news}. *Prophecy* is the noun denoting a prediction, especially one made by someone claiming to have

supernatural or magical powers {their prophecies did not materialize}. *Prophe-size* is an erroneous form.

**proscribe; prescribe.** To *proscribe* something is to prohibit it {legislation that pro-scribes drinking while driving}. To *prescribe* is to say officially what must be done in a particular situation {Henry VIII prescribed the order of succession to include three of his children} or to specify a medical remedy {the doctor prescribed anti-inflammatory pills and certain exercises}.

**protuberance.** So spelled. Perhaps because *protrude* means "to stick out," writers want to spell *protuberance* (= something that bulges out) with an extra *r* (after the *t*). But the words are from different roots.

**proved; proven.** *Proved* is the preferred past participle for the verb *prove* {it was proved to be true}. Use *proven* only as an adjective {a proven success}.

**proximity.** See close proximity.

**purposely; purposefully.** What is done *purposely* is done deliberately or inten-tionally—"on purpose." What is done *purposefully* is done with a certain goal or a clear aim in mind. An action may be done *purposely* without any particular interest in a specific result—that is, not *purposefully*.

**question whether; question of whether; question as to whether.** The first phrasing is traditionally considered best. The others are phraseologically in-ferior. See as to.

**quick(ly).** *Quickly* is the general adverb. But *quick* is properly used as an adverb in the idiomatic phrases *get rich quick* and *come quick*. See also 5.160.

**quote; quotation.** Traditionally a verb, *quote* is often used as an equivalent of *quotation* in speech and informal writing. Also, there is a tendency for writers (especially journalists) to think of *quotes* as contemporary remarks usable in their writing and of *quotations* as being wisdom of the ages expressed pithily.

**rack; wrack.** The spelling *rack* is complex: it accounts for nine different nouns and seven different verbs. Indeed, it is standard in all familiar senses {racking his brain} {racked with guilt} {nerve-racking} {rack and ruin}. *Wrack* is the standard spelling only for the noun meaning "seaweed, kelp."

**raise; raze.** To *raise* is to elevate, move upward, enhance, bring up, etc. {we raised some money}. To *raze* is to demolish, level to the ground, remove, etc. {they razed the building}.

**reason.** Two points. First, as to *reason why*, although some object to the supposed redundancy of this phrase, it is centuries old and perfectly acceptable English. *Reason that* is not always an adequate substitute {can you give reasons why *that* is preferable to *which* as a restrictive relative pronoun?}. Second, *reason . . . is because* is not good usage—*reason . . . is that* being preferred {the reason we returned on July 2 is that we wanted to avoid hordes of tourists}.

**recur; reoccur.** To *recur* is to happen again and again {his knee problems recurred throughout the rest of the year}, to return to in one's attention or memory {she recurred to her war experiences throughout our visit}, or to come back to one's

attention or memory {the idea recurred to him throughout the night}. To *re-occur* is merely to happen again {the leak reoccurred during the second big rain}.

**reek.** See **wreak**.

**reference; referral.** A *reference* is a source of information, a person to provide information, an authority for some assertion, or a strong allusion to something. It's also an attributive adjective {reference book}. It's not universally accepted as a transitive verb. *Referral* is a narrower term denoting the practice or an instance of (1) directing someone to another person who can help, especially a professional or a specialist, or (2) relegating some matter to another body for a recommendation or resolution.

**refrain; restrain.** To *refrain* is to restrain yourself or to keep from doing something; it is typically an act of self-discipline. Other people *restrain* you by stopping you from doing something, especially by using physical force {if you don't refrain from the disorderly conduct, the police will restrain you}. Yet it is possible to restrain oneself by controlling one's own emotions or behavior—and doing so is known as *self-restraint*.

**refute, vb.** To *refute* is to prove that a statement or an idea is wrong—not merely to deny or rebut.

**regardless.** See **irregardless**.

**regrettable; regretful.** What is *regrettable* is unfortunate or unpleasant enough to make one wish that things were otherwise. A person who is *regretful* feels sorry or disappointed about something done or lost. The adverb *regretfully*, not *regretfully*, is the synonym of *unfortunately*.

**rein; reign.** A *rein* (usually plural) controls a horse; it is the right word in idioms such as *take the reins*, *give free rein*, and, as a verb, *rein in*. A *reign* is a state of or term of dominion, especially that of a monarch but by extension also dominance in some field. This is the right word in idioms such as *reign of terror* and, as a verb, *reign supreme*.

**relegate; delegate.** To *relegate* is to assign a lesser position than before {the officer was relegated to desk duty pending an investigation}. To *delegate* is to authorize a subordinate to act in one's behalf {Congress delegated environmental regulation to the EPA} or to choose someone to do a particular job or to represent an organization or group {she was delegated to find a suitable hotel for the event}.

**reluctant.** See **reticent**.

**renounce.** See **denounce**.

**reoccur.** See **recur**.

**repellent; repulsive.** *Repellent* and *repulsive* both denote the character of driving others away. But *repulsive* has strong connotations of being so disgusting as to make one feel sick.

**repetitive; repetitious.** Both mean "occurring over and over." But whereas *re-*

*petitive* is fairly neutral in connotation, *repetitious* has taken on the nuance of tediousness that induces boredom.

**repress.** See **oppress**.

**repulsive.** See **repellent**.

**restive; restful.** *Restive* means "so dissatisfied or bored with a situation as to be impatient for change." *Restful* means "peaceful, quiet, and conducive to relaxation."

**restrain.** See **refrain**.

**reticent.** Avoid using this word as a synonym for *reluctant*. It means "unwilling to talk about what one feels or knows; taciturn" {when asked about the incident, the congressional representative became uncharacteristically reticent}.

**revenge.** See **avenge**.

**rob; steal.** Both verbs mean "to wrongfully take [something from another person]." But *rob* also includes a threat or act of harming, usually but not always to the person being robbed.

**role; roll.** A *role* is an acting part {the role of Hamlet} or the way in which someone or something is involved in an activity or situation, especially in reference to influence {the role that money plays as an incentive}. *Roll* has many meanings, including a roster {guest roll}; something made or done by rolling {roll of the dice}; and something in the shape of a cylinder or sphere, whether literally {dinner roll} or figuratively {bankroll}. *Roll* can also be a verb meaning to rotate {roll over!}, to wrap [something] {roll up the leftovers}, or to move forward {the cart rolled down the hill}.

**run the gauntlet.** See **gauntlet**.

**sacrilegious.** This is the correct spelling. There is a tendency by some to switch the *i* and *e* on either side of the *l*, but in fact the word is related to *sacrilege*, not *religion* or *religious*.

**seasonal; seasonable.** *Seasonal* means either "happening as expected or needed during a particular time of year" {snow skiing is a seasonal hobby} or "relating to the seasons or a season" {the seasonal aisle stays stocked most of the year, starting with Valentine's Day gifts in January}. *Seasonable* means "timely" {seasonable motions for continuance} or "fitting the time of year" {it was unseasonably cold for July}.

**self-deprecating.** See **deprecate**.

**semi-.** See **bi-**.

**semiannual.** See **biannual**.

**sensor.** See **censer**.

**sensual; sensuous.** What is *sensual* involves indulgence of the physical senses—especially sexual gratification. What is *sensuous* usually applies to aesthetic enjoyment; it is primarily hack writers who imbue the word with salacious connotations.

**sewer; sewage; sewerage.** *Sewer* denotes a wastewater pipe or passage. *Sewage*

denotes the waste carried through such a pipe or passage. *Sewerage* denotes the sewer system as a whole, including treatment plants and other facilities, and the function of the disposal of sewage and wastewater in general.

**shall.** This word is complicated. The reality is that *shall* is little used in everyday contexts outside British English—not in North America but also not in Australia, Ireland, or Scotland. In legal contexts, it frequently appears in statutes, rules, and contracts, supposedly in a mandatory sense but actually quite ambiguously. It is perhaps the most widely litigated word in the law—with wildly varying results in its multifarious interpretations. Legal drafters are therefore often advised to avoid it altogether in favor of *must*, *is*, *will*, *may*, and other words or phrases among which *shall*'s various meanings can be allocated.<sup>8</sup> See also 5.131.

**shear; sheer.** *Shear* is the noun or verb relating to (1) the cutting tool or (2) a force affecting movement, such as a crosswind or the slipping of plates in an earthquake. *Sheer* is most often an adjective meaning (1) "semitransparent" {a sheer curtain}, (2) "nothing but" {sheer madness}, or (3) "almost vertical" {a sheer cliff}.

**shine.** When this verb is intransitive, it means "to give or make light"; the past tense is *shone* {the stars shone dimly}. When it is transitive, it means "to cause to shine"; the past tense is *shined* {the caterer shined the silver}.

**should.** See *ought*.

**sight; site.** A *sight* may be something worth seeing {the sights of London} or a device to aid the eye {the sight of a gun}, among other things. A *site* is a place, whether physical {a mall will be built on this site} or electronic {website}. The figurative expression meaning "to focus on a goal" is *to set one's sights*. Cf. *cite*.

**simplestic.** This word, meaning "oversimplified," has derogatory connotations. Don't confuse it with *simple*.

**since.** This word may relate either to time {since last winter} or to causation {since I'm a golfer, I know what "double bogey" means}. Some writers erroneously believe that the word relates exclusively to time. But the causal *since* was a part of the English language before Chaucer wrote in the fourteenth century, and it is useful as a slightly milder way of expressing causation than *because*. Still, if there is any possibility of confusion with the temporal sense, use *because*.

**sink.** Inflected *sink-sank-sunk*. Avoid using *sunk* as a simple past, as in *the ship sunk*.

**site.** See *cite*; *sight*.

**slander.** See *defamation*.

**slew; slough; slue.** As a noun, *slew* (/sloo/) is an informal word equivalent to *many* or *lots* {you have a slew of cattle}. It is sometimes misspelled *slough* (a legitimate noun meaning "a grimy swamp," pronounced either /sloo/ or

8\. See Garner, *Legal Writing in Plain English*, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013), 125–28; *Garner's Dictionary of Legal Usage*, 3rd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011), 952–55 (collecting many authorities).

/slow/). The phrase *slough of despond* (from Bunyan's *Pilgrim's Progress* [1678]) means "a state of depression or sadness from which one cannot easily lift oneself." This term is etymologically different from *slough* (/sləf/), meaning "to discard" {slough off dry skin}. As a present-tense verb, to *slew* is to turn or slide violently or suddenly in a different direction—or to make a vehicle do so {the car keeps slewing sideways}. In American English, a variant spelling of this verb is *slue*. As a past-tense verb, *slew* corresponds to the present-tense *slay* {Cain slew Abel}.

**slow.** This word, like *slowly*, may be an adverb. Generally, prefer *slowly* {go slowly}. But in colloquial usage *slow* is often used after the verb in a pithy statement, especially an injunction {go slow!} {take it slow}. See also 5.160.

**slue.** See *slew*.

**sneak.** This verb is conjugated as a regular verb: *sneak*–*sneaked*–*sneaked*. Reserve *snuck* for dialect and tongue-in-cheek usages.

**space.** As a figurative noun, this word has become a voguish equivalent of *area* {though not initially interested in journalism, he has decided to move into that space}. Although (or perhaps because) this usage is au courant, avoid it. See also *area*.

**spit.** If used to mean "to expectorate," the verb is inflected *spit*–*spat*–*spit* {he spat a curse} {he has spit many a curse}. But if used to mean "to skewer," it's *spit*–*spitted*–*spitted* {the hens have been spitted for broiling}.

**stanch.** See *staunch*.

**stationary; stationery.** *Stationary* describes a state of immobility or of staying in one place {if it's stationary, paint it}. *Stationery* denotes writing materials, especially paper for writing letters, usually with matching envelopes {love letters written on perfumed stationery}. To remember the two, try associating the *-er* in *stationery* with the *-er* in *paper*; or remember that a *stationer* is someone who sells the stuff.

**staunch; stanch.** *Staunch* is an adjective meaning "ardent and faithful" {a staunch Red Sox supporter}. *Stanch* is the American English verb meaning "to stop the flow"; it is almost always used in regard to bleeding, literally or metaphorically {after New Hampshire the campaign hemorrhaged; only a big win in South Carolina could stanch the bleeding}. In British English, however, *staunching the flow* is the standard wording.

**steal.** See *rob*.

**strait; straight.** A *strait* (often pl.) is (1), literally, a narrow channel connecting two large bodies of water separated by two areas of land {Strait of Magellan} or (2), figuratively, a difficult position {dire straits}. This is the word used in compound terms with the sense of constriction {straitlaced} {straitjacket}. *Straight* is most often an adjective meaning unbent, steady, sober, candid, honest, or heterosexual.

**strata, n.** This is the plural for *stratum*. Keep it plural {Fussell identified nine discrete strata in American society}. Avoid the double plural *stratas*.

**strategy; tactics.** A *strategy* is a long-term plan for achieving a goal. A *tactic* is a shorter-term method for achieving an immediate but limited success. A strategy might involve several tactics. By the way, although *strategy* is so spelled, *stratagem* has an *a* in the middle syllable.

**subject.** See *citizen*.

**subsequent.** See *consequent*.

**such.** This word, when used to replace *this* or *that*—as in "such building was later condemned"—is symptomatic of legalese. *Such* is actually no more precise than *the, this, that, these*, or *those*. It's perfectly acceptable, however, to use *such* with a mass noun or plural noun when the meaning is "of that type" or "of this kind" {such impudence galled the rest of the family} {such vitriolic exchanges became commonplace in the following years}. See also **as such**.

**sufficient.** See *adequate*.

**supersede.** The root of this word derives from *sedeo*, the Latin word for "to sit, to be established," not *cedo*, meaning "to yield." Hence the spelling varies from the root in words such as *concede, recede*, and *secede*. Avoid the variant *supersede*.

**sympathy.** See *empathy*.

**systematic; systemic.** *Systematic* means "according to a plan or system, organized methodically, or arranged in a system." *Systemic*, meaning "affecting the whole of something," is limited in use to physiological systems {a systemic disease affecting several organs} or, by extension, other systems that may be likened to the body {systemic problems within the corporate hierarchy}.

**tactics.** See *strategy*.

**take.** See *bring*.

**tantalizing; titillating.** A *tantalizing* thing torments us because we want it badly yet it is always just out of reach. A *titillating* thing tickles us pleasantly, literally or figuratively, and the word often carries sexual connotations.

**text, vb.** Inflected *text-texted-texted*, as a regular verb. Avoid using the uninflected *text* for the past-tense forms.

**that; which.** These are both relative pronouns (see 5.56–66). In polished American prose, *that* is used restrictively to narrow a category or identify a particular item being talked about {any building that is taller must be outside the state}; *which* is used nonrestrictively—not to narrow a class or identify a particular item but to add something about an item already identified {alongside the officer trotted a toy poodle, which is hardly a typical police dog}. *Which* is best used restrictively only when it is preceded by a preposition {the situation in which we find ourselves}. Nonrestrictively, it is almost always preceded by a comma, a parenthesis, or a dash. (In British English, writers and editors seldom observe the distinction between the two words.) Is it a useful distinction? Yes. The language inarguably benefits from having a terminological as well as a punctuational means of telling a restrictive from a nonrestrictive relative pronoun, punctuation often being ill-heeded. Is it acceptable to use *that* in ref-

erence to people? Is *friends that arrive early* an acceptable alternative to *friends who arrive early*? The answer is yes. *Person that* has long been considered good idiomatic English. Even so, *person who* is nearly three times as common as *person that* in edited English. See also 6.27.

**there; their; they're.** *There* denotes a place or direction {stay there}. *Their* is the possessive pronoun {all their good wishes}. *They're* is a contraction of *they are* {they're calling now}.

**therefore; therefor.** The words have different senses. *Therefore*, the common word, means "as a result; for that reason" {the evidence of guilt was slight; therefore, the jury acquitted the defendant}. *Therefor*, a legalism, means "for it" or "for them" {he took the unworn shirt back to the store and received a refund therefor}.

**thus.** This is the adverb—not *thusly*. Use *thus* (it's called a *flat adverb*). See 5.160.

**till.** This is a perfectly good preposition and conjunction {open till 10 p.m.}. It is not a contraction of *until* and should not be written 'til.

**timbre; timber.** *Timbre* is a musical term meaning "tonal quality of the sound made by a particular musical instrument or voice." *Timber* is the correct spelling in all other uses, which relate to trees or wood.

**titillating.** See *tantalizing*.

**tolerance; toleration.** *Tolerance* is the habitual quality of being *tolerant*—that is, willing to allow people to say, believe, or do what they want without criticism or punishment. *Toleration* is a particular instance of being *tolerant*.

**torpid.** See *turbid*.

**tortious; tortuous; torturous.** What is *tortious* relates to torts (civil wrongs) or to acts that give rise to legal claims for torts {tortious interference with a contract}. What is *tortuous* is full of twists and turns and therefore makes travel difficult {a tortuous path through the woods}. What is *torturous* involves severe physical and mental suffering {a torturous exam}.

**toward; towards.** The preferred form in American English is *toward*: this has been so since about 1900. In British English, *towards* predominates. The same is true for other directional words, such as *upward*, *downward*, *forward*, and *backward*, as well as *afterward*. The use of *afterwards* and *backwards* as adverbs is neither rare nor incorrect (and is preferred in British English). For the sake of consistency, many American editors prefer the shorter forms without the final s.

**transcript; transcription.** A *transcript* is either a written record, as of a trial or a radio program, or an official record of a student's classes and grades. *Transcription* is the act or process of creating a transcript.

**transpire, vb.** Although its traditional sense is "to come to be known" {it transpired that he had paid bribes}, *transpire* more commonly today means "happen" or "occur" {what transpired when I was away?}. In that newer sense, *transpire* still carries a vague odor of jargon and pretentiousness. But that is disappearing.

**trillion.** See **billion**.

**triumphal; triumphant.** Things are *triumphal* (done or made to celebrate a victory) {a triumphal arch}. But only people feel *triumphant* (displaying pleasure and pride as a result of a victory or success) {a triumphant Caesar returned to Rome}.

**turbid; turgid; torpid.** *Turbid* water or liquid is thick and opaque from churned-up mud or detritus {a turbid pond}; by extension, *turbid* means "unclear, confused, or disturbed" {a turbid argument}. *Turgid* means "swollen," and by extension "pompous and bombastic" {turgid prose}. *Torpid* means "idle, lazy, and sleepy" {a torpid economy}.

**ultimate.** See **penultimate**.

**unexceptional; unexceptionable.** The first means "not very good; no better than average." The second means "not open to objection."

**uninterested.** See **disinterested**.

**unique.** Reserve this word for the sense "one of a kind." Avoid it in the sense "special, unusual." Phrases such as *very unique, more unique, somewhat unique*, and so on—in which a degree is attributed to *unique*—aren't the best usage. See also 5.89.

**unlawful; illegal; illicit; criminal.** This list is in ascending order of negative connotation. An *unlawful* act may even be morally innocent (for example, letting a parking meter expire). But an *illegal* act is something that society formally condemns, and an *illicit* act calls to mind moral degeneracy {illicit drug use}. Unlike *criminal*, the first three terms can apply to civil wrongs.

**unorganized.** See **disorganized**.

**unreadable.** See **illegible**.

**upon.** See **on**.

**upward(s).** See **toward**.

**use; utilize.** *Use* is usually the best choice for simplicity. *Utilize* is most often an overblown alternative of *use*, but it is occasionally the better choice when the distinct sense is "to use to best effect" {how to utilize our staff most effectively}.

**venal; venial.** A person who is *venal* is mercenary or open to bribery—willing to use power and influence dishonestly in return for money {a venal government official}; a thing that is *venal* is purchasable {venal livestock}. A *venial* fault or sin is trivial enough to be pardonable or excusable {a venial offense} {a venial error}.

**verbal; oral.** If something is put into words, it is *verbal*. Technically, *verbal* covers both written and spoken utterance. If you wish to specify that something was conveyed through speech, use *oral*.

**very.** See **much**.

**vocation.** See **avocation**.

**voluminous.** See **compendious**.

**waive; wave.** To *waive* is to relinquish claim to or not to insist on enforcing. To *wave* is to move to and fro.

**wangle.** See **wrangle**.

**whether.** Generally, use *whether* alone—not with the words *or not* tacked on (they didn't know whether to go). The *or not* is necessary only when you mean to convey the idea "regardless of whether" (we'll finish on time whether or not it rains). On the distinction between *whether* and *if*, see *if*.

**which.** See **that**.

**while.** *While* may substitute for *although* or *whereas*, especially if a conversational tone is desired (while many readers may disagree, the scientific community has overwhelmingly adopted the conclusions here presented). Yet because *while* can denote either time or contrast, the word is occasionally ambiguous; when a real ambiguity exists, *although* or *whereas* is the better choice.

**who; whom.** Here are the traditional rules: *who* is a nominative pronoun used as (1) the subject of a finite verb (it was Jim who bought the coffee today) or (2) a predicate nominative when it follows a linking verb (that's who). *Whom* is an objective pronoun that may appear as (1) the object of a verb (I learned nothing about the man whom I saw) or (2) the object of a preposition (the woman to whom I owe my life). Today there are two countervailing trends: first, there's a decided tendency to use *who* colloquially in most contexts; second, among those insecure about their grammar, there's a tendency to overcorrect oneself and use *whom* when *who* would be correct. Writers and editors of formal prose often resist the first of these; everyone should resist the second. See also 5.66.

**whoever; whomever.** Avoid the second unless you are certain of your grammar (give this book to whoever wants it) (I cook for whomever I love). If you are uncertain why these examples are correct, use *anyone who* or (as in the second example) *anyone*.

**who's; whose.** The first is a contraction (who's on first?), the second a possessive (whose life is it, anyway?). Unlike *who* and *whom*, *whose* may refer to things as well as people (the Commerce Department, whose bailiwick includes intellectual property). See 5.64.

**workers' compensation.** This is the preferred name for workplace accident-insurance plans, not *workmen's compensation*. Notice that *workers* is always plural. When used as a phrasal adjective, it is hyphenated (workers'-compensation system).

**wrack.** See **rack**.

**wrangle; wangle.** To *wrangle* is to argue, especially angrily over a long period (still wrangling over their parents' estate). To *wangle* is to get something or arrange for something to happen by cleverness, manipulation, or trickery (wangle a couple of last-minute tickets).

**wreak; reek.** *Wreak* means (1) "to cause a great deal of harm or many problems" (to wreak havoc on the administration) or (2) "to punish someone in revenge"

{to wreak vengeance on his erstwhile friends}. The past tense is *wreaked*, not *wrought*. (The latter is an archaic form of the past tense and past participle of *work*.) *Reek* can be a verb meaning "to stink" or a noun meaning "stench."

**wrong; wrongful.** These terms are not interchangeable. *Wrong* has two senses: (1) "immoral, unlawful" {it's wrong to bully smaller children} and (2) "improper, incorrect, unsatisfactory" {many of the math answers are wrong}. *Wrongful* likewise has two senses: (1) "unjust, unfair" {wrongful conduct} and (2) "un sanctioned by law; having no legal right" {it was a wrongful demand on the estate}.

**yes.** See **affirmative, in the.**

**your; you're.** *Your* is the possessive form of *you* {your class}. *You're* is the contraction for *you are* {you're welcome}.
