# The Gregg Reference Manual

## **Section 11. Grammar, Usage, and Style**

The following entries will help you avoid a number of common mistakes in usage.

---

**A–an.** In choosing *a* or *an*, consider the sound (not the spelling) of the word that follows. Use the article *a* before all consonant sounds, including sounded *h* (as in *hat*), long *u* (as in *use*), and *o* with the sound of *w* (as in *one*).

| a day | a unit | a one-week delay |
| --- | --- | --- |
| a week | a union | a 60-day note |
| a year | a uniform | a CPA |
| a home | a youthful spirit | a B.A. degree |
| a house | a euphoric feeling | a PSAT score |
| a hotel | a European trip | a UN resolution |

Use *an* before all vowel sounds (except long *u*) and before a silent *h*.

| an asset | an heir | an AT&T product |
| --- | --- | --- |
| an essay | an hour | an EPA ruling |
| an eyesore | an honor | an FTC ruling |
| an input | an honest man | an IRS audit |
| an opening | an hors d'oeuvre | an NBC newscast |
| an outcome | an 8-hour day | an OPEC price cut |
| an umbrella | an 80-year-old man | an ROI objective |
| an upsurge | an 11 a.m. meeting | an X-ray reading |

In speech, both *a historic occasion* and *an historic occasion* are correct, depending on whether the *h* is sounded or left silent. In writing, *a historic occasion* is the form more commonly used.

When you are dealing with an abbreviation, the choice of *a* or *an* will depend on whether you pronounce the expression letter by letter or as a word. For example, if you pronounce URL as *yoo-arr-ell*, you would write "a URL." If you pronounced it as *erl*, you would write "an URL." (See also ¶501b.)

Abbreviations pronounced letter by letter are called initialisms; abbreviations pronounced as words are called acronyms. (See also ¶501b.)

In the following examples, note that when the consonants *F, H, L, M, N, R*, and *S* are pronounced as letters at the start of an initialism, they are preceded by *an*. When these same letters introduce an acronym and are pronounced as part of a word, they are preceded by *a*.

| Pronounced Letter by Letter | Pronounced as a Word |
| --- | --- |
| an FBI agent | a FICA tax increase |
| an HMO physician | a HUD project |
| an L.A.-based firm | a LIFO method of inventory valuation |
| an M.B.A. degree | a MADD fund-raising drive |
| an NAACP member | a NATO strategy |
| an R.S.V.P. | a RICO investigation |
| an SRO performance | a SWAT team |

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| a CEO's compensation package | a CARE package | a DUI conviction |
| a DARE researcher | a P&L statement | a PEN conference |
| a VOA broadcast | a VISTA project | a WTO decision |
| a WATS line |  |  |

**NOTE:** As a rule, use *a* or *an* before each item in a series. However, if the series describes a single concept, use only one article at the outset.

> We need *a* scanner, *a* printer, and *a* shredder. (**NOT:** *a* scanner, printer, and shredder.)
>
> Amy's lunch typically consists of *a* peach, *a* pear, and *an* apple.
>
> BUT: The Benners live a hop, skip, and jump away from our house.

**A–of.** Do not use *a* in place of *of*.

> What sort of turnout did you have at your seminar?
>
> (**NOT:** What sort a turnout did you have at your seminar?)
>
> The weather has been kind of cool for this time of year.
>
> (**NOT:** The weather has been kinda cool for this time of year.)

**A–per.** See *Per–a*.

**About.** See *More than–over–nearly–almost–less than–about–around*.

**About–at.** See *At–about*.

**Above.** Avoid the use of above before a noun. (See also Said.)

> in the paragraph above **OR:** in the preceding paragraph
>
> (**RATHER THAN:** in the above paragraph)

**Accidentally.** Note that this word ends in *ally*. (The form accidently is incorrect.)

**A.D.–B.C.** A.D. (abbreviation of *anno Domini*, Latin for "in the year of our Lord") and B.C. ("before Christ") are usually written in all-caps, with a period following each letter and with no internal space. Do not use a comma to separate B.C. or A.D. from the year.

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 150 B.C. |  |  |
| 465 A.D. (ordinary usage) |  |  |
| in the first century B.C. |  |  |
| A.D. 465 (formal usage) |  |  |

You may also type A.D. and B.C. in small caps (A.D., B.C.).

**NOTE:** In works of history and theology, the term *A.D.* is often replaced by the abbreviation *C.E.* (meaning "in the Common Era"); *B.C.* is replaced by *B.C.E.* (meaning "before the Common Era").

**Additionally.** Avoid the use of additionally as a transitional expression. Use in addition, moreover, furthermore, or besides instead. (See ¶138a.)

> **AWKWARD:** *Additionally*, the new packaging will reduce costs by 20 percent.
>
> **BETTER:** *Moreover*, the new packaging will reduce costs by 20 percent.

**Ad hominem.** The correct spelling of this Latin expression is *ad hominem* (**NOT:** ad homonym). A person who makes an ad hominem attack on an opponent in a dispute or debate is attacking the opponent's character rather than the opponent's arguments. This expression, which literally means "to the man," is so commonly used that it does not need to be italicized.

**Ado–adieu–to-do.** *Ado* means "fussing over trivial things." *Adieu* means "farewell."

> Paula decided to walk out without further *ado*. (Without making a fuss.)
>
> Paula decided to walk out without further *adieu*. (Without saying good-bye.)

*To-do* has much the same meaning as *ado* but is used in place of *ado* in certain idiomatic expressions.

> Lloyd is making a big *to-do* over the transfer of his key sales rep to another region.
>
> From my perspective, it's all much *ado* about nothing.

**Adverse–averse.** *Adverse* means "unfavorable, harmful, hostile." *Averse* means "opposed (to), having a feeling of distaste (for)."

> This research report will have an *adverse* [unfavorable] effect on our sales.
>
> The medication you are taking could have *adverse* [harmful] side effects.
>
> I am not *adverse* [opposed] to working on weekends for the next month.
>
> I am *adverse* [opposed] to exercise in any form.
>
> **BUT:** I have *adverse* [hostile] feelings about exercise in any form.

**Affect–effect.** *Affect* is normally used as a verb meaning "to influence, change, assume." *Effect* can be either a verb meaning "to bring about" or a noun meaning "result, impression."

> The court's decision in this case will not *affect* [change] the established legal precedent.
>
> She *affects* [assumes] an unsophisticated manner.
>
> It is essential that we *effect* [bring about] an immediate improvement in sales.
>
> It will be months before we can assess the full *effect* [result] of the new law.
>
> This new policy is likely to *effect* [bring about] the growth of international investments.
>
> This new policy is likely to *affect* [change] the growth of international investments. (Note that this sentence does not indicate whether international investments will increase or decrease.)

**NOTE:** In psychology, *affect* is used as a noun meaning "feeling, emotion," and the related adjective *affective* means "emotional." Because of the limited context in which these terms are likely to be used with these meanings, it should be easy to distinguish them from *effect* as a noun and the related adjective *effective*.

> We need to analyze the *effect* [results] of this new marketing strategy.
>
> We need to analyze the *affects* [emotions] produced by this conflict.
>
> Which technique is *effective* [capable of producing the desired results]?
>
> Let's deal with the *affective* [emotional] factors first.

**Afterward–afterwards.** Both forms are correct, but *afterward* is more common in U.S. usage.

**Age–aged–at the age of**

> I interviewed a man *aged 52* for the job. (**NOT:** a man age 52.)
>
> I don't plan to retire *at the age of 65*. (**NOT:** at age 65.)

**NOTE:** Elliptical references to age—for example, *at age 65*—should not be used except in technical writing such as human resources manuals.

> See the chart on page 64 for the schedule of retirement benefits for employees who retire *at age 65*.

**Aggravate.** Use *aggravate* to mean "make something worse."

> Although she meant to ease the tension between her partners, Eve's remarks actually aggravated the situation. (Made the situation worse.)
>
> Avoid using aggravate to mean "irritate, annoy, exasperate."
>
> **AVOID:** I get so aggravated when Joe tries to tell me how to do my job.
>
> **BETTER:** I get so irritated when Joe tries to tell me how to do my job.

**Ain't.** *Ain't* has long been considered nonstandard usage, but it is acceptable in certain idiomatic expressions.

> Making that many mistakes in one document *ain't* easy.
>
> Two thousand dollars for a thirty-minute speech? That *ain't* hay!
>
> You *ain't* seen nothin' yet.
>
> If it *ain't* broke, don't fix it. (One could clean up this expression grammatically and write, "If it isn't broken, don't fix it," but then one would lose the special flavor of the original.)

**All of.** *Of* is not needed after *all* unless the following word is a pronoun serving as the object of the preposition *of*. However, it is not incorrect to use *of* after *all*.

> *All* my plans have gone up in smoke.
>
> **OR:** *All of* my plans have gone up in smoke.
>
> *All* the staff members belong to the softball team.
>
> **OR:** *All of* the staff members belong to the softball team.
>
> *All of* us belong to the softball team.

**All right.** Like *all wrong*, the expression *all right* should be spelled as two words. (While some dictionaries list *alright* without comment, this spelling is not generally accepted as correct.)

**Allude–refer.** *Allude* means "to refer indirectly to something"; *refer* means "to make specific mention of."

> The CEO merely *alluded* to a possible decline in sales this year, but he provided no specific details.
>
> To divert the analysts' attention, he *referred* to the data in last year's annual report.

**Almost.** See *More than–over–nearly–almost–less than–about–around*.

**Almost–all most.** See also *Most*.

> The plane was *almost* [nearly] three hours late.
>
> We are *all most* pleased [all very much pleased] with the new schedule.

**A lot–alot–allot.** The phrase *a lot* (meaning "to a considerable quantity or extent") always consists of two words. Do not spell this phrase as one word (*alot*).

> Thanks *a lot* [**NOT:** alot] for all your help on this year's budget.

Do not confuse this phrase with the verb *allot* (meaning "to distribute or assign a share of something").

> You will have to *allot* a portion of next year's budget to cover unforeseen expenses, even though you are not likely to have a lot of money left over after you cover your basic operations.

→ See *Kind of–sort of* and *Kind of a*.

**Aloud–out loud.** Both terms mean essentially the same thing, but in certain expressions one term sounds more natural than the other. For example, people "laugh out loud," they often "think out loud," and they may say, "For crying out loud." On the other hand, it sounds more natural for someone to "read aloud to children" or "utter her innermost thoughts aloud."

There is a very subtle difference between these two versions of the same sentence.

> Although the letter was marked "Confidential," he read it *out loud* to everyone in the department. (*Out loud* conveys a louder, more emphatic breach of the silence.)
>
> Although the letter was marked "Confidential," he read it *aloud* to everyone in the department. (*Aloud* suggests a gentler tone of voice.)

**Already–all ready**

> The order had *already* [previously] been shipped.
>
> The order is *all ready* [all prepared] to be shipped.
>
**Alternate–alternative.** In most respects, these two words have distinct meanings. *Alternate* means "happening in turns."

> The committee ordinarily meets at 10:30 on *alternate* Thursdays. (In other words, on every other Thursday.)

*Alternate* also refers to someone who substitutes for another. Thus *an alternate juror* is someone who hears all the testimony in a court case and is prepared to replace one of the original twelve jurors if the need arises.

> Howard Draper and Kris Zetterberg will rotate as *alternate* captains during the coming season.

*Alternative* can mean "offering a choice or an option" or "one of several choices." The word appears in such common terms as *alternative medicine*, *alternative therapies*, *the alternative press*, *the alternative minimum tax*, *alternative music*, and *alternative rock*.

> If the planning board turns down our proposal to build a warehouse at the site we've selected, our only *alternative* will be to look for a site in another town.
>
> Next month's speaker will discuss *alternative* fuel technologies.
>
Despite the attempt of grammarians to keep the use of these two terms separate, *alternate* is now acceptably used as a synonym for *alternative* in certain contexts.

> If May 24 is not a good day for you to meet with us, we can suggest some *alternate* [**OR:** *alternative*] dates.
>
> Motorists should look for *alternate* [**OR:** *alternative*] routes while Highway 35 is closed for repairs.
>
> The full value of an unused ticket can be applied toward the purchase of a ticket to an *alternate* [**OR:** *alternative*] destination.

**Altogether—all together**

> He is *altogether* [entirely] too lazy to be a success.
>
> The papers are *all together* [all in a group] in the binder I sent you.

**Always—all ways**

> She has *always* [at all times] done good work.
>
> We have tried in *all ways* [by all methods] to keep our employees satisfied.

**Among—between.** See *Between—among*.

**Amount—number.** Use *amount* for things in bulk, as in "a large amount of lumber."

Use *number* for individual items, as in "a large number of inquiries."

> Monday's ad generated a large *amount* of *interest*.
>
> Monday's ad generated a large *number* of *phone calls*. (**NOT:** a large amount.)

**And.** Retain *and* before the last item in a series, even when that last item consists of two words joined by *and*.

> We need to increase our expense budgets for advertising, staff training, *and* research and development.
>
> (**NOT:** We need to increase our expense budgets for advertising, staff training, research and development.)

Beginning a sentence with *and* or some other coordinating conjunction (*but, or*, or *nor*) can be an effective means—*if not overused*—of giving special attention to the thought that follows the conjunction. No comma should follow the conjunction at the start of a new sentence unless a parenthetical element occurs at that point.

> Last Friday George promised to submit the market analysis this Monday. *And* then he took off on a two-week vacation.
>
> Tell him to return to the office at once. *Or* else.
>
> **BUT:** George called from Lake Tahoe to say that the report was undergoing some last-minute changes and would be on my desk by 11 a.m. *And*, to my delight, it was! (Here the comma following the conjunction *And* precedes the parenthetical element to my delight.)
>
> Groucho Marx wrote this thank-you note: "I've had a perfectly wonderful evening. But this wasn't it."

**NOTE:** Each of the sentences above illustrates the fact that beginning a sentence with a conjunction can be an effective rhetorical device. However, as a group these sentences also show that if you overuse this device you will quickly dissipate its effectiveness.

**And etc.** Never use *and* before *etc*. (See *Etc.—et al*.)

**And/or.** Avoid this legalistic term in ordinary writing. Instead of writing *A and/or B*, write *A or B or both*.

**Another.** Although *another* is often used colloquially as a synonym for *additional*, avoid this usage in formal writing.

> **FORMAL:** I have four copies left, but I will need an *additional* ten copies.
>
> **INFORMAL:** . . . but I will need *another* ten copies.

**Anxious–eager.** Both *anxious* and *eager* mean "desirous," but *anxious* also implies fear or concern.

> I'm *anxious* to hear whether we won the bid or not.
>
> I'm *eager* [**NOT:** anxious] to hear about your new house.
>
**Anymore–any more**

> We used to vacation in Bermuda, but we don't go there anymore [any longer].
>
> Please call me if you have any more [any additional] suggestions.

**Anyone–any one.** See ¶1010, note.

**Anytime–any time**

> Come see us *anytime* you are in town. (One word meaning "whenever.")
>
> Did you have dealings with Crosby at *any time* in the past? (Two words after a preposition such as at.)
>
> Can you spend *any time* [any amount of time] with Jill and me when you next come to Tulsa?

**Anyway–any way**

> *Anyway* [in any case], we can't spare him now.
>
> If we can help in *any wa*y [by any method], please phone.

**Appraise–apprise**

> We would like to *appraise* [set a value on] Mrs. Ellsworth's estate.
>
> I will *appraise* [inform] you of any new developments.
>
> I will keep you *apprised* of the reactions of the board members to your proposal.
>
> (**NOT:** I will keep you *appraised* of the reactions of the board members to your proposal.)

**Appreciate.** When used with the meaning "to be thankful for," the verb appreciate requires an object.

> **NOT:** We would appreciate if you could give us your decision by May 1.
>
> **BUT:** We would appreciate it if you could give us your decision by May 1. (Pronoun as object.)
>
> **OR:** We would appreciate *your* [**NOT:** you] giving us your decision by May 1. (Noun clause as object. See ¶647b on the use of your before a verb ending in *ing*.)
>
> We will always appreciate the *help* you gave us. (Noun as object.)
>
> I will appreciate *whatever you can do for us*. (Noun clause as object.)

**Aren't I.** This idiomatic expression is grammatically incorrect: it uses a third-person plural verb, *are*, with a first-person singular pronoun, *I*. Nevertheless, it is considered acceptable in informal writing and in speech. In formal situations, use am I not.

> **INFORMAL:** I'm getting a new company car this year, *aren't I*?
>
> **FORMAL:** I'm getting a new company car this year, *am I not*?

**Around.** See *More than–over–nearly–almost–less than–about–around*.

**As.** Do not use as for *that* or *whether*.

> I do not know *whether* [**NOT:** as] I can go.

Use *because*, *since*, or *for* rather than *as* in clauses of reason.

> I can't attend the meeting in Omaha, *because* [**NOT:** as] I'll be out on the West Coast that day.

**As–as if–like.** See *Like–as–as if*.

**As . . . as–not so . . . as.** The term *as . . . as* is now commonly used in both positive and negative comparisons. Some writers, however, prefer to use *not so . . . as* for negative comparisons.

> Bob is every bit *as* bright *as* his older sister. (Positive comparison.)
>
> It is not *as* important *as* you think. **OR:** . . . *not so* important *as* you think. (Negative comparison.)

**NOTE:** Do not replace the second *as* with *than*.

> Our family spends twice as much money on entertainment *as* on food.
>
> (**NOT:** Our family spends twice *as* much money on entertainment *than* on food.)
>
**As–equally.** See *Equally–as*.

**As far as.** *As far as* may be used as a preposition or as a subordinating conjunction.

> I can drive you *as far as* Spokane. (Used as a preposition.)
>
> I would recommend this template *as far as* format is concerned. (Used as a subordinating conjunction.)
>
> **BUT NOT:** I would recommend this template *as far as* format. (Either create a clause following *as far as*, as in the example above, or change *as far as* to *on the basis of* or a similar expression: *I would recommend this template on the basis of format*.)

**As per.** See *Per–a*.

**Assure.** See *Ensure–insure–assure*.

**At–about.** Use either *at* or *about* but not both words together. If you write "I'll meet you at 6:30," you're promising to be there "at 6:30 on the dot." If you write "I'll meet you about 6:30," you're promising to be there "around 6:30, but don't hold me to the minute, okay?" In effect, using *at* and *about* together suggests precision and vagueness at the same time. For that reason use one or the other but not both.

**Attorney–lawyer.** These terms are not synonyms. An *attorney* is someone empowered to serve as another person's legal agent. A *lawyer* is someone licensed to practice law. An attorney does not have to be a lawyer; by means of a legal instrument called a *power of attorney*, a layperson can be authorized to act as another person's agent. An attorney who is also a lawyer is known as an *attorney at law*. (See ¶804c.)

**Augur–auger.** To say that something *augurs* well or does not *augur* well means that the future for that thing either looks bright or looks dismal. Avoid the temptation to spell *augur* as *auger*, since an *auger* is a tool for boring holes.

**Author.** Do not use *author* as a verb.

> How many books have you *written* [**NOT:** authored]?

**Averse–adverse.** See *Adverse–averse*.

**Awhile–a while.** The one-word form is an adverb; the two-word form is a noun.

> You may have to wait *awhile*. (Adverb.)
>
> You may have to wait for *a while*. (Noun; object of the preposition *for*.)
>
> I ran into him *a while* back.

**NOTE:** When a preposition precedes this expression, be sure to spell *a while* as two words.

> Once in *a while* I get together with my old friends from high school.

**Back-pedal–soft-pedal.** See *Soft-pedal–back-pedal*.

**Backward–backwards.** Both forms are correct, but *backward* is more common in U.S. usage; for example, "to lean over *backward*."

**Bad–badly.** Use the adjective bad (not the adverb badly) after the verb feel or look. (See ¶1067.)

> I feel *bad* [**NOT:** badly] about the mistake.
>
> **BUT:** He was hurt *badly*.

**NOTE:** The only way you can "feel badly" is to have your fingertips removed first.

**Balance.** Do not use balance to mean "rest" or "remainder" except in a financial or accounting sense.

> I plan to use the *rest* of my vacation time next February.
>
> (**NOT:** I plan to use the *balance* of my vacation time next February.)
>
> **BUT:** The *balance* of the loan falls due at the end of this quarter.

**Bald-faced–bare-faced.** When it is shockingly obvious that a statement is untrue, that statement is often referred to as *a bald-faced lie* or *a bare-faced lie* (**NOT:** a bold-faced lie **OR:** a bear-faced lie).

**B.C.–A.D.** See *A.D.–B.C*.

**Bear–bare.** Use *bear* (**NOT:** bare) in the following expressions: *bear the brunt*, *bear in mind*, *bear the name*, *bear witness*, and *bring to bear*. However, use *bare* in these expressions: *to bare one's soul*, *to face up to the bare facts*, and *a bare-knuckled* or *bare-handed fight*. When you are faced with adversity, it's a good thing to *grin and bear it*. If instead you decide to *grin and bare it*, you could be seriously adding to your problems.

**Because.** See *Reason is because*.

**Because—since.** See *Since—because*.

**Because of.** See *Due to—because of—on account of*.

**Beg the question.** This phrase is often used mistakenly to mean "to avoid answering a question" or "to invite a question." Here is what it really means: "to assume as a fact the very thing you are trying to prove." The illustration most often cited is this: "Parallel lines never meet because they are parallel."

**Being that.** Do not use *being that* for *since* or *because*.

> *Because* I arrived late, I could not get a seat.
>
> (**NOT:** *Being that* I arrived late, I could not get a seat.)

**Bellwether.** A *bellwether* originally was the sheep who led the flock. Now the term designates a leader who points the way to the future. Please note that the correct spelling of this word is *bellwether* (**NOT:** bellweather).

**Beside—besides**

> I sat *beside* [next to] Mr. Parrish's father at the meeting.
>
> *Besides* [in addition], we need your support of the measure.

**Between–among.** Ordinarily, use *between* when referring to two persons or things and *among* when referring to more than two persons or things.

> The territory is divided evenly *between* the two sales representatives.
>
> The profits are to be evenly divided *among* the three partners.

Use *between* with more than two persons or things when they are being considered in pairs as well as in a group.

> In packing china, be sure to place bubble sheets *between* the plates.
>
> The memo says something different when you read *between* the lines.
>
> I like to walk barefoot on the beach and feel the sand *between* my toes.
>
> In the course of these negotiations with our trading partners, I've been shuttling *between* Washington, London, Berlin, and Moscow.
>
> *Between* you, me, and the gatepost, we don't stand a chance of making budget.

Consider how *between* and *among* convey different shades of meaning in the following examples.

> Joel resigned because of the numerous disagreements *between* him and his partners. (Use *between* when the intended meaning pits Joel against all of his partners as a bloc.)
>
> Joel resigned because of the numerous disagreements *between* him and each of his partners. (Here again use *between* when Joel's disagreements with his partners are on a one-to-one basis.)
>
> Joel resigned because of the numerous disagreements *among* his partners. (Use *among* when there are multiple disagreements involving two or more partners in the firm.)

**Between you and me** (**NOT: I**). See ¶1055b.

**Biannual–biennial–semiannual.** *Biannual* and *semiannual* both mean "occurring twice a year." *Biennial* means "occurring every two years." Because of the possible confusion between *biannual* and *biennial*, use *semiannual* when you want to describe something that occurs *twice* a year.

> **PREFERRED:** our *semiannual* sales conference
>
> **CLEARER THAN:** our *biannual* sales conference

If you think that your reader could misconstrue *biennial*, avoid the term and use *every two years* instead.

> Within our global organization each national company holds its own sales conference *on a semiannual basis* [**OR:** *semiannually*]; an international sales conference is scheduled *on a biennial basis* [**OR:** *biennially* **OR:** *every two years*].

**Biweekly–bimonthly.** These two words do not mean the same thing. Moreover, *bimonthly* has two quite different meanings, which could confuse your readers.

> If you are paid *biweekly* [every two weeks], you get 26 checks a year.
>
> If you are paid *bimonthly* [twice a month], you get only 24 checks a year.
>
> **OR:** If you are paid *bimonthly* [every two months], you get only 6 checks a year.

**NOTE:** To keep your meaning clear, avoid *bimonthly* and say "twice a month" or "every two months." You may also use *semimonthly* to mean "twice a month."

**Borrow–lend.** See *Lend–borrow*.

**Both–each.** *Both* means "the two considered together." *Each* refers to the individual members of a group considered separately.

> *Both* designs are acceptable.
>
> The designs are *each* acceptable.
>
> *Each* sister complained about the other.
>
> (**NOT:** *Both* sisters complained about the other.)

**NOTE:** Use *each* in cases where *both* leads to confusion or ambiguity.

> **CONFUSING:** There are two statues on *both* sides of the entrance hall. (Is there a total of two statues or four?)
>
> **CLEAR:** There are two statues on each *side* of the entrance hall.
>
> **OR:** There is a statue on *each* side of the entrance hall.
>
> ➠ See *Each–either–both*.

**Both alike–both equal–both together.** *Both* is unnecessary with *alike*, *equal*, or *together*.

> These laser printers are *alike*. (**NOT:** both alike.)
>
> These tape systems are *equal* in cost. (**NOT:** both equal.)
>
> We will travel *together* to Japan. (**NOT:** both travel together.)

**Bring–take.** *Bring* indicates motion toward the speaker. *Take* indicates motion away from the speaker.

> Please *bring* the research data with you when you next come to the office. (This office is where the speaker works.)
>
> **BUT:** Please *take* the research data with you when you next go to the office. (The speaker is referring to someone else's office.)
>
> Please *take* the enclosed letter to Farley when you go to see him.
>
> You may *take* my copy with you if you will *bring* it back by Friday.

➠ See note under *Come–go*.

**But . . . however.** Use one or the other.

> We had hoped to see the show, *but* we couldn't get tickets.
>
> **OR:** We had hoped to see the show; *however*, we couldn't get tickets.
>
> (**BUT NOT:** . . . *but* we couldn't get tickets, *however*.)

**But what.** Use *that*.

> I do not doubt *that* [**NOT:** but what] he will be elected.

**By and large.** This expression, which means "on the whole," should be spelled *by and large* (**NOT:** by enlarge **OR:** by in large).

**Can–could.** See *May–can* (*might–could*).

**Cannot help but.** This expression is a confusion of two others, namely, *can but* and *cannot help*.

> *I can but* try. (**BETTER:** I *can only* try.)
>
> I *cannot help* feeling sorry for her. (**NOT:** I cannot help but feel sorry for her.)

**Capital–capitol–Capitol.** As an adjective, *capital* can mean "chief" or "foremost" (*of capital importance*); it can also mean "punishable by death" (*a capital crime*). As a noun, *capital* can mean "a principal sum of money" (*a project requiring a great deal of capital*), or it can designate a large letter as opposed to a lowercase letter (*A*, *B*, or *C* vs. *a*, *b*, *c*).

*Capital* can also be used to mean "the city that serves as the seat of a country's government (*Washington, D.C., is this nation's capital*). Be sure to distinguish *capital* in this sense from these two terms: *capital*, which refers to the building in which a state legislative body meets, and *Capitol*, which refers to the building in which the U.S. Congress meets. The term *Capitol Hill*, which literally refers to the site of the Capitol, is also an imaginative name for the legislative branch of the U.S. government—the Senate and the House of Representatives or, collectively, the U.S. Congress.

**Cease–seize.** *Cease* (meaning "to stop") is the correct word to use in expressions such as *cease fire* and *cease and desist*. *Seize* (meaning "to grasp" or "take by force") is the correct word to use in expressions such as *seize the day* and *seize the opportunity*.

**Celebrity–notoriety.** *Celebrity* means "fame." *Notoriety* also means "fame" but of a disreputable nature.

> With the publication of her third novel, Jenna has finally achieved the *celebrity* she deserves. With the conviction of Fred Koenig and his two sons, the Koenig family has achieved an unparalleled *notoriety* in this community.

**Chaise longue.** So many people misspell this term as *chaise lounge* and mispronounce it as well that many dictionaries now present *chaise lounge* as an acceptable variation. However, *chaise longue* remains the correct way to spell this word. (For the plural of *chaise longue*, see page 207.)

**Class.** See *Kind*.

**Classic–classical.** *Classic* means "serving as a standard or model" (as in *a classic triple play*, *a blunder of classic proportions*). *Classical* refers to the language and art of earlier cultures (as in *a study of classical Greek* or *sketches of classical architecture*).

> Last night's concert offered a *classic* performance of Mahler's Ninth Symphony.
>
> Next week's concert will offer an odd program of *classical* and pop music.

**Click–click on.** To select an item such as a button on the computer screen, one *clicks* the button. The word *on* is not needed.

> To get the company's mailing address, *click* Contact Us. (**NOT:** click on Contact Us.)

**Collide with–crash into.** Use *collide with* when two moving objects come together with violent impact. If only one of the objects is moving, use *crash into*.

> Wilson claims he was going only 35 miles an hour when he *collided with* an SUV.
>
> Vivian lost control of the car and *crashed into* a telephone pole.
>
> (**NOT:** Vivian lost control of the car and *collided with* a telephone pole.)

**Come–go.** The choice between verbs depends on the location of the speaker. *Come* indicates motion *toward*; *go*, motion *away from*. (See also *Bring–take*.)

> When Bellotti *comes* back, I will *go* to the airport to meet him.
>
> *A manager speaking over the phone to an outsider:* Will it be convenient for you to come to our office tomorrow?

**NOTE:** When discussing your travel plans with a person at your destination, adopt that person's point of view and use come.

> An outsider speaking over the phone to a manager: Will it be convenient for me to come to your office tomorrow?
>
> Midwesterner to Californian: I am coming to California during the week of the 11th. I will bring the plans with me if they are ready.

However, if you are discussing your travel plans with someone who is *not* at your destination, observe the regular distinction between *come* and *go*.

> *An outsider speaking to an outsider:* I hope it will be convenient for me to *go* to their office tomorrow.
>
> *Midwesterner to Midwesterner:* I am *going* to California during the week of the 11th. I will *take* the plans with me if they are ready.

**Come to—come and.** In formal writing, use *come to* instead of the colloquial *come and*.

> **FORMAL:** Come *to* see me.
>
> **INFORMAL:** Come *and* see me.

**Coming down the pike.** This expression, which means "coming in the future," should be spelled c*oming down the pike* (**NOT:** coming down the pipe). *Pike* in this expression means "turnpike."

**Coming to terms with.** This expression, which means "coming to an agreement," should be spelled *coming to terms with* (**NOT:** coming to turns with).

**Company—firm—corporation.** See *Firm—company—corporation*.

**Compare to—compare with.** See ¶1077.

**Complement—compliment.** *Complement* as a noun means "something that completes" or "one of two mutually completing parts"; as a verb it means "to complete, to be complementary to." *Compliment* as a noun means "an admiring or flattering remark"; as a verb it means "to praise, to pay a compliment to."

> A simple dessert of berries and sherbet makes a fine *complement* to an elaborate meal with several rich courses.
>
> The CEO was full of *compliments* for your sales presentation yesterday.

**Complementary—complimentary.** *Complementary* means "serving to complete" or "mutually supplying what each other lacks." *Complimentary* means "flattering" or "given free."

> Our top two executives work so well as a team because they bring *complementary* skills and expertise to their jobs.
>
> The CEO had many *complimentary* things to say about your sales presentation.
>
> May I get a *complimentary* copy of your new book?

**Comprise–compose.** *Comprise* means "to contain, consist of"; *compose* means "to make up." The parts *compose* (make up) the whole; the whole *comprises* (contains) the parts; the whole is *composed of* (**NOT:** is comprised of) the parts.

> The parent corporation *comprises* [consists of] three major divisions.
>
> Three major divisions *compose* [make up] the parent corporation.

Do not use *comprise* in the passive.

> The parent corporation *is composed of* [is made up of] three major divisions.
>
> (**NOT:** The parent corporation *is comprised of* three major divisions.)

Do not use *comprise* and *include* as synonyms. *Include* implies that what follows represents some but not all of the parts. *Comprise* implies that what follows embraces all the parts.

> The alphabet *includes* the letters A to Y.
>
> **BUT:** The alphabet *comprises* [**OR:** *consists of*] the letters A to Z. (See the entry for *Consists of–includes*.)
>
**Consensus.** One seeks a *consensus* (**NOT:** a consensus of opinion).

**Consists of–includes.** Use *consists of* to introduce a complete list of items; use *includes* to introduce a partial list.

> This mailing list *consists of* all our active accounts.
>
> This mailing list *includes* the active accounts that were opened this year.

**NOTE:** Do not use *etc.* or *and so on* at the end of a list introduced by *includes*, since the verb makes it sufficiently clear that the list is not complete. (See also the entry for *Etc.–et al*.)

**Convince–persuade.** You *convince* others when you get them to agree that what you are saying is correct. You *persuade* others when you get them to do something that they hadn't planned to do. *Convince* implies changing another person's mind; *persuade* implies getting another person to act. When used in a sentence, *persuade* is typically followed by an infinitive (as in the examples below).

> I *convinced* Vic that Maria's proposal was more cost-effective than his.
>
> I *persuaded* Vic to drop his objections to Maria's proposal.
>
> Alice *convinced* me that my situation was not as bad as I had thought.
>
> She *persuaded* me to tear up my letter of resignation.

**Copyright.** *Copyright* is a legal term that refers to the exclusive right to publish or reproduce something (typically, a manuscript). *Copyrighting* signifies the act of obtaining a copyright. If you use *copyright* as a verb, be sure to spell the past tense and the past participle as *copyrighted* (**NOT:** copywritten); the present participle is *copyrighting* (**NOT:** copywriting).

> Make sure the material you plan to publish is not already *copyrighted*.
>
> My firm specializes in *copyrighting* material to be published as books or articles.

**Copywriter.** This term refers to a person who writes advertising copy. It has no connection with copyrighting.

**Core–corps.** *Core* refers to the central part or the heart of something. *Corps* refers to a group of people united in a common activity (such as the U.S. Marine Corps or the Peace Corps). When pronounced, *corps* sounds exactly like *core* because the *p* and *s* in *corps* are silent. As a result, it is easy to misuse these words in certain expressions.

> loyal to the *corps* (**NOT:** core)
>
> rotten to the *core* (**NOT:** corps)

**Corporation–firm–company.** See *Firm–company–corporation*.

**Could have–could of.** See *Of–have*.

**Could not care less.** To say that you "could not care less" means that you do not care at all. To say that you "could care less" implies that your inability to care has not yet reached rock bottom. If the first meaning is the one you wish to communicate, do not omit *not*. (See also ¶1074c.)

> If Val does not attend our class reunion, I *could not care less*. (In effect, I don't care at all.)
>
> When I told another classmate about Val, he said, "Well, I *could care less*—but then I'd really have to work at it."

**Couldn't–hardly.** See *Hardly*.

**Crash into.** See *Collide with–crash into*.

**Crescendo.** This term refers to a process in which something gradually becomes louder or greater. Something can reach a peak or a climax as the result of a crescendo, but it is incorrect to say that something "has reached a crescendo."

> The traffic jams on the Long Island Expressway were so bad last Sunday that the sound of honking horns reached *the highest level* before noon.
>
> (**NOT:** The traffic jams on the Long Island Expressway were so bad last Sunday that the sound of honking horns reached *a crescendo* before noon.)

**Data.** See ¶1018b.

**Day and age.** This expression, which refers to the present time, uses *and* (**NOT:** in).

> We no longer do things that way in this *day and age*. (**NOT:** in this day in age.)

**Déjà vu.** Strictly speaking, this term refers to the illusion that what you are now experiencing for the first time is something that happened to you in the past.

> The first time we went to Maine for a summer vacation, I had a *déjà vu* sensation that I had been living there for most of my life.

The term is now loosely used to refer to something that actually did happen in the past. In your own writing, use *déjà vu* only to refer to an illusion.

> **AVOID:** When I went back for my twentieth college reunion, I had that *déjà vu* sensation of coming to the campus for the first time as a freshman. (With apologies to Yogi Berra, this is not a case of "déjà vu all over again." This is a memory or a recollection.)
>
> **BETTER:** When I went back for my twentieth college reunion, it brought back memories of coming to the campus for the first time as a freshman.

**Deserts–desserts.** Although these two words are pronounced alike, *deserts* refers not to the final course of a meal (*desserts*) but to a richly deserved reward. Thus if someone has worked hard to achieve a particular goal, that person is entitled to his or her "just deserts." In the extreme case of a seven-year-old boy who has eaten all of his broccoli at dinner, one might justifiably say that he has earned his "just desserts." Otherwise, always write "just deserts."

**Dialogue.** The use of *dialogue* as a verb is a matter of taste. If it sounds like jargon to you (as it does to most people), use a different word.

> Parents need to spend more time *talking* with their children.
>
> (**RATHER THAN:** Parents need to spend more time *dialoguing* with their children.)

**Different–differently.** When the meaning is "in a different manner," use the adverb *differently*.

> I wish we had done it *differently*.
>
> It came out *differently* than we expected. (See ¶1077.)

After linking verbs and verbs of the senses, the adjective *different* is correct. (See ¶1067.)

> That music sounds completely *different*.
>
> He seems [appears] *different* since his promotion.
>
> Don't believe anything *different*. (Meaning "anything that is different.")

**Different from–different than.** See ¶1077.

**Dilemma.** A *dilemma* is a situation in which one must make a choice between two or more unpleasant alternatives. Do not use *dilemma* as a synonym for *problem* or *predicament*.

> Many communities now face a common *dilemma*: whether to raise real estate taxes or cut essential services.
>
> Many communities now face a common *problem*: how to provide adequate shelter for the homeless.

**Disc–disk.** *Disc* is the customary spelling in terms such as *disc brakes*, *compact disc*, *laser disc*, *optical disc*, *videodisc*, and *disc jockey*.

*Disk* is the customary spelling in computer terms such as *disk drive*, *disk space*, *disk directory*, *disk operating system*, *floppy disk*, *hard disk*, and *diskette*; it is also the spelling used for *spinal disk* and *slipped disk*.

**Disinterested–uninterested.** The primary meaning of *disinterested* is "unbiased, impartial." This word is now often used incorrectly as a synonym for *uninterested*, which means "unwilling to take an interest in."

> I am trying to evaluate these conflicting accounts from a *disinterested* [impartial] perspective.
>
> I can't understand why my son is so totally *uninterested* [**NOT:** disinterested] in his courses.

As Roy Blount Jr. has observed in *Alphabet Juice*, "Every time you use *disinterested* to mean *uninterested*, an angel dies."

**Done.** When you hear people say "I done it," please tell them tactfully to say "I did it." (See also ¶1032b, e.)

**Don't (do not).** When you hear people use one of the following expressions—*he don't*, *she don't*,* or *it don't*—please tell them tactfully to use *doesn't*.

|  | |
| --- | --- |
| He *doesn't* talk easily. |  **BUT:** I *don't* think so. |
| She needs help, *doesn't* she?  | They *don't* want any help. |
| It *doesn't* seem right to penalize them. | We *don't* understand. |

**Doubt that–doubt whether.** Use *doubt that* in negative statements and in questions. Use *doubt whether* in all other cases. (See also *If–whether*.)

> We do not *doubt* that she is capable. (Negative statement.)
>
> Does *anyone* doubt that the check was mailed? (Question.)
>
> I *doubt* whether I can go.

**Due diligence–due process.** Do not be tempted to write *do* in these expressions. The correct word is *due*. This is also the correct spelling to use when "giving someone his or her due" or "giving credit where credit is due."

**Due to–because of–on account of.** *Due to* introduces an adjective phrase and should modify nouns. It is normally used only after some form of the verb *to be* (*is, are, was, were,* etc.).

> Her success is *due to* talent and hard work. (*Due to* modifies success.)

B*ecause of* and *on account of* introduce adverbial phrases and should modify verbs.

> He resigned *because of* ill health. (*Because of* modifies resigned.)
>
> (**NOT:** He resigned *due to* ill health.)

**Each—either—both.** Use *each* in cases where *either* or *both* leads to confusion or ambiguity. (See also *Both—each*.)

> **CONFUSING:** The landscaper has planted two gingko trees on *either* side of the driveway. (A total of two trees or four trees?)
>
> **CONFUSING:** The landscaper has planted two gingko trees on *both* sides of the driveway. (Again, a total of two trees or four trees?)
>
> **CLEAR:** The landscaper has planted two gingko trees on *each* side of the driveway. (A total of four trees.)
>
> **CLEAR:** The landscaper has planted one gingko tree on *each* side of the driveway. (A total of two trees.)

**Each other—one another.** Use *each other* to refer to two persons or things and *one another* for more than *two*.

> Al and Ed respected *each other's* abilities.
>
> The four winners congratulated *one another*.

**Eager—anxious.** See *Anxious—eager*.

**Economic—economical.** *Economic* refers to economics (as in *the economic factors affecting the volatility of the stock market*). *Economical* means "thrifty" (as in *my mother's economical habit of keeping a canister for "string too short to be saved"*).

**Effect—affect.** See *Affect—effect*.

**E.g.** See *I.e.–e.g.*

**Either–each–both.** See *Each–either–both*.

**Emeritus–emerita.** The terms *emeritus* (m.) and *emerita* (f.) are honorary designations used mainly with academic titles to signify that the holders of those titles are now retired from active service. These terms usually follow the title (for example, *Paul Shea*, *professor emeritus*; *Jean Lovett, professor emerita*). However, when a title is long, *emeritus* or *emerita* may precede the title for smoother reading (for example, *Denton Fox, emeritus professor of Asian studies* **OR:** *Denton Fox*, *professor emeritus of Asian studies*). Capitalize these honorary titles when they appear before a person's name (for example, *Professor Emeritus Hugh Benz*; *Dean Emerita Ann Cory*).

**En masse.** This French expression (meaning "in one body" or "all together") is pronounced "on mass" but is spelled *en masse*. The phrase does not need to be italicized because it is considered part of the English language.

**Enormity.** Use this word only in reference to an outrageous act or a monstrous condition. Do not use *enormity* to mean "great size"; use *enormousness* or *enormous size* instead.

> We are still trying to cope with the *enormity* of the scandal.
>
> **BUT:** We must find ways to deal with the *enormous size* of the national debt. (Those who are appalled by the nation's current level of debt could, in this instance, justifiably refer to the *enormity* of the national debt.)

**Ensure–insure–assure.** *Ensure* means "to make certain." *Insure* means "to protect against loss." *Assure* means "to give someone confidence"; the object of this verb should always refer to a person.

> I want to *ensure* [make certain] that nothing can go wrong tomorrow.
>
> I want to *insure* this necklace [protect it against loss] for $5000.
>
> I want to *assure* you [give you confidence] that nothing will go wrong.

**Enthused over.** Use *was* or *were enthusiastic about* instead.

> The sales staff was *enthusiastic about* next year's styles.
>
> (**NOT:** The sales staff *enthused over* next year's styles.)

**Entitled–titled.** The primary meaning of *entitled* is "having a right to."

> After a year you will be *entitled* to two weeks of vacation time.

It is now generally acceptable to use *entitled* as a synonym for *titled* and say that a book or a similar item is *entitled* in a certain way.

> The book I plan to write about my attempts to survive marriage and five children will be *entitled* [**OR:** *titled*] <u>Looking Out for Number Seven</u>.
>
> You'll find some valuable tips in the article *entitled* "Protecting Yourself From Identity Theft." (Note that a comma is not used before a quoted title.)

**Equal.** See *Both alike–both equal–both together*.

**Equally–as.** Use either *equally* or *as* but not both words together.

> This printer is the latest model, but that one is *equally* good.
>
> **OR:** This printer is the latest model, but that one is just as good.
>
> (**BUT NOT:** This printer is the latest model, but that one is *equally* as good.)
>
> I would pick Pam for that job, but Joe is *equally* capable.
>
> **OR:** I would pick Pam for that job, but Joe is every bit *as* capable.
>
> (**BUT NOT:** I would pick Pam for that job, but Joe is *equally* as capable.)

**Espresso.** This word should be spelled and pronounced as *espresso* (**NOT:** expresso).

**Etc.–et al.** The abbreviation *etc.* stands for *et cetera* and means "and other things." The abbreviation *et al.* stands for et alii and means "and other people." *Etc.* is used at the end of a list of things that has been left incomplete. *Et al.* is primarily used in bibliographic citations when a given work has three or more authors; in that case, only the first author is named and *et al.* takes the place of the other authors' names. (See ¶1537c.) Do not use *and* before *etc.* or *et al.* since these abbreviations already contain a word *(et)* meaning "and." Although these abbreviations represent Latin phrases, they are considered part of the English language and thus are not italicized in ordinary use.

Use a comma before and after *etc*. and *et al.* (unless the expression falls at the end of a sentence or requires a stronger mark of punctuation such as a semicolon). In formal writing, use *and the like* or *and so on* in place of *etc.*; use *and others* or *and other people* in place of *et al.*

**NOTE:** Do not use *etc.* or an equivalent expression at the end of a series introduced by *such as*, *for example*, or *e.g.* Such terms imply that only a few selected examples will be given; therefore, it is unnecessary to add *etc*. or *and so on*, which suggests that further examples could be given.

> As part of its employee educational program, the company offers courses in report writing, business communication, grammar and style, *and so on*.
>
> **OR:** . . . the company offers courses *such as* report writing, business communication, and grammar and style.
>
> (**BUT NOT:** . . . the company offers courses *such as* report writing, business communication, grammar and style, *and so on*.)

➠ *For the use or omission of a comma before* such as, *see ¶148–149*.

**Ethnic references.** When identifying U.S. citizens or residents as members of a certain ethnic group, use great care in choosing an appropriate term. There is often a good deal of disagreement within the group about which terms are acceptable and which are offensive, so always respect individual preferences if you know what they are. (See ¶348.)

**a.** Use *African Americans* or *Afro-Americans* to refer to black people of African ancestry. The terms *Negroes* and *colored people* are rarely used today except in the names of long-established organizations (for example, the United Negro College Fund and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People). Use the term *blacks* only in a context where you might also refer to *whites*. Use a term like *African Americans* (which reflects ethnic ancestry rather than skin color) in a context where you are also referring to other ethnic groups such as Latinos.

> the votes of Latinos and *African Americans*
>
> (**RATHER THAN:** the votes of Latinos and *blacks*)

**b.** Use *Hispanics* to refer broadly to people who trace their roots to Latin America or Spain. Use *Latinos* to refer to people of Latin-American ancestry (that is, from Central or South America). The term *Chicanos* may be used to refer to people of Mexican ancestry, but some members of this group consider the term offensive; a safer alternative is *Mexican Americans*.

Within the groups designated *Hispanic*, *Latino*, or *Chicano*, some people are white and some black. Therefore, do not use these terms in the same context with *white* or *black*.

> the buying patterns of Hispanics and *African Americans*
>
> (**RATHER THAN:** the buying patterns of Hispanics and *blacks*)

When referring to a group of men, use *Latinos* or *Chicanos*. When referring to a group of women, use *Latinas* or *Chicanas*. When reference is being made to a mixed group of men and women, it has been traditional to simply use the masculine form to refer to the entire group. However, it is now preferable to use both the masculine and the feminine forms in such references; for example, *Latinos and Latinas* **OR:** *Chicanos and Chicanas*.

**NOTE:** The term *Hispanic* does not apply to Brazilians, who trace their roots to Portugal and speak Portuguese. Refer to these people simply as Brazilians.

**c.** The terms *Anglo–Americans* and *Anglos* are used in some parts of the United States to refer to white people who have an English-speaking background.

> Are there significant differences in the consumer preferences of Latinos, African Americans, and *Anglos*? (Note that all three groups are identified here by ethnic ancestry and not by color.)

Ideally, the term *whites* should be used only in a context where you might also refer to *blacks*. However, in the absence of a more widely accepted term than *Anglos* or *Anglo-Americans*, use *whites* even though other groups are identified by ethnic ancestry in the same context.

> Are there significant differences in the consumer preferences of Latinos, African Americans, and *whites*?

**d.** Use *Asian Americans* to refer to people of South and East Asian ancestry. When appropriate, use a more specific term—for example, *Japanese American* or *Korean American*. When referring to people who live in Asia, use *Asians* (rather than *Asiatics* or *Orientals*, which many now consider offensive).

**e.** The term *Native American* is still the way many American Indians prefer to be identified. Many others, however, like to be called by the name of their particular tribe (for example, Hopi or Sioux); these same people prefer to be called *American Indians* when reference is made to all the tribes in the United States. The term *Indian* should be used only to refer to people who live in India.

**f.** The term *people of color* refers broadly to people who trace their roots to non-European countries—for example, African Americans, Native Americans, and Asian Americans.

**g.** Many ethnic references consist of two words, the second of which is *American*. Do not hyphenate terms like *an African American*, *a German American*, or *a Chinese American* when they are used as nouns, because the first element in each case modifies the second.* Hyphenate such terms, however, when they are used as adjectives: *African-American entrepreneurs*, *a German-American social club*, *Chinese-American restaurants*. Also hyphenate such terms when the first element is a prefix; for example, *Afro-Americans*, *Anglo-Americans*.

**NOTE:** The term *hyphenated American* refers to an earlier stylistic practice of hyphenating nouns like *Polish Americans* and *Swedish Americans*. This term has fallen into disfavor because it implies that hyphenated Americans are not fully American.

**Everyday–every day**

> You'll soon master the *everyday* [ordinary] routine of the job.
>
> He has called *every day* [each day] this week.

**Everyone–every one.** See ¶1010, note.

**Every time.** Always spell this expression as two words.

> *Every time* I come up with a new idea, Wilkerson shoots it down.
>
> (**NOT:** *Everytime* I come up with a new idea, Wilkerson shoots it down.)

**Ex–former.** Use *ex-* with a title to designate the person who *immediately* preceded the current titleholder in that position; use *former* with a title to designate an earlier titleholder.

> Charles Morganstern is the *ex-president* of the West Harrisburg Chamber of Commerce. (He held office immediately before the current president.)
>
> **BUT:** Charles Morganstern is a *former* president of the West Harrisburg Chamber of Commerce. (He held office sometime before the current president and that person's immediate predecessor.)

**Except.** When *except* is a preposition, be sure to use the objective form of a pronoun that follows. (See also ¶1055b.)

> Everyone has been notified *except* Jean and *me*. (**NOT:** except Jean and I.)

**Fait accompli.** This French expression, which means "a done deal," should begin with the word fait (**NOT:** fate). Because of the frequency with which this expression is used, it does not require italics.

**Fall between–fall through.** Something can be said to "fall between two stools," but something cannot be said to "fall between the cracks." Something may "fall through the cracks."

**Farther–further.** *Farther* refers to actual distance; *further* refers to figurative distance and means "to a greater degree" or "to a greater extent."

> The drive from the airport was *farther* [in actual distance] than we expected.
>
> Let's plan to discuss the proposal *further* [to a greater extent].

**Fell swoop.** In the expression *in one fell swoop*, note that the adjective is spelled *fell* (**NOT:** foul or fowl). *Fell* means "deadly." This expression is sometimes facetiously changed to "one swell foop."

**Fewer–less.** *Fewer* refers to number and is used with *plural* nouns. *Less* refers to degree or amount and is used with *singular* nouns.

> *Fewer* accidents [a smaller number] were reported than we expected.
>
> *Less* effort [a smaller degree] was put forth by the organizers, and thus *fewer* people [a smaller number] attended.

Note the difference in meaning in the following pair of examples:

> In the future our company may hire *fewer* skilled workers [a smaller number of workers who are skilled].
>
> In the future our company may hire *less* skilled workers [workers with a lower level of skill].

→ *See also the usage note on* more *on page 391*.

When dealing with things that can be counted, you may use either fewer than or less than, depending on the effect you want to achieve.

> *Fewer than* 20 people attended the in-service workshop. (*Fewer than* is grammatically correct, but it sounds formal, stiff, and even a little stuffy.)
>
> *Less than* 20 people attended the in-service workshop. (Strictly speaking, the use of *less than* here is not grammatically correct, but like the expression "It's me," *less than* is acceptable because it sounds more colloquial, more natural.)

The expression *less than* (rather than *fewer than*) precedes nouns referring to periods of time, distance, amounts of money, quantities, and percentages.

|  |  |
|---|---|
| less than ten years ago | less than 35 years old |
| less than six miles away | less than 10°F |
| less than $1 million | less than 20 percent of the voters |
| less than 20 pounds | less than half of our customers |

After a reference to a number of items, the expression *or fewer* would certainly be correct, but *or less* is more commonly used.

> in 100 words or less (**RATHER THAN:** in 100 words or fewer)
> in groups of six people or less (**RATHER THAN:** in groups of six people or fewer)
>
> <u>Sign over a checkout line:</u> 10 items or less. (This wording sounds better in the casual setting of a supermarket than *10 items or fewer*.)

**Firm–company–corporation.** Use *firm* to refer only to a business partnership or a small unincorporated business but not to a company or a corporation. **EXCEPTION:** Within the financial industry, brokerage firms that later become corporations are still referred to as firms.

**First–firstly, etc.** In enumerations, use the forms *first*, *second*, *third* (**NOT:** firstly, secondly, thirdly).

**Fiscal–financial.** The adjective *fiscal* (as in f*iscal year 2009* or *FY2009*) can be used to refer to all types of financial matters—those of governments and private businesses. However, with the exception of *fiscal year*, it is better to use *fiscal* only in connection with government matters and to use financial in all other situations.

**NOTE:** Within a governmental context, it is customary to use *monetary* (rather than *fiscal*) to refer to the nation's money supply.

> The Federal Reserve will be meeting next week to discuss possible changes in *monetary* policy. (Changes in policy that would affect the nation's money supply.)

**Flack–flak.** A *flack* is a PR person—a professional who provides publicity for various clients. The term *flak* originated in World War II and refers to the debris from exploding antiaircraft shells that could bring down an airplane. Since then *flak* has taken on the broader meaning of criticism intended to bring down a person's reputation.

> Senator Dingwall has taken a lot of *flak* for the speech he gave last Friday.
>
> He could use a good *flack* to help him recover from this public relations disaster.

**Flammable–inflammable.** Both terms mean "easily ignitable, highly combustible." Since some readers may misinterpret inflammable to mean "nonflammable," flammable is the clearer form.

**Flaunt–flout.** To flaunt means "to show off, to make a showy display of." To flout means "to disrespect or show one's contempt for something." Although *flaunt* is often used where *flout* is the appropriate word, careful writers will respect the difference between these two words.

> In his contact with others, Hal does not *flaunt* his wealth or his political connections.
>
> Those restaurant owners intend to *flout* the no-smoking rules recently enacted.
>
> **BUT:** Those restaurant owners intend to *flaunt* their decision to disregard the no-smoking rules recently enacted.
>
**Flesh out–flush out.** These two terms are often confused, even though they mean different things. To flesh something out means to add details or specifics to a bare-bones idea. To flush something out means to force something out into the open (as hunting dogs do with quail in a forest).

> I like the idea you're toying with. Now flesh it out so that the board has a full–blown proposal to evaluate.
>
> He's not telling us everything about his involvement in the Crawley affair. We need to flush out the full story.
>
**Former–ex.** See Ex–former.

**Former–first.** Former refers to the first of two persons or things. When more than two are mentioned, use first. (See also Latter–last.)

> This item is available in wool and in Dacron, but I prefer the former.
>
> This item is available in wool, in Dacron, and in Orlon, but I prefer the first.
>
**Fortuitous–fortunate.** Fortuitous means "accidental, happening by chance." *Fortunate* means "lucky, being rewarded beyond what one deserves."

> I hadn't seen Arnie in years, so it was fortuitous [it happened by chance] that we found ourselves seated next to each other on a flight to Houston.
>
> When he invited me to join him in a new partnership that he was setting up, I realized how fortunate [lucky] I was to be in the right place at the right time.
>
**From–off.** Use from (**NOT:** off) with persons.

> I got the answer I needed from Margaret [**NOT:** off Margaret].
>
**Fulsome.** Do not use fulsome to mean "lavish" or "profuse." As commonly used, fulsome has the negative sense of "excessive." For example, fulsome praise is praise so excessive as to be offensive.

**Further–farther.** See Farther–further.

**Gauntlet–gantlet.** A gauntlet is a glove. At one time a person actually threw down his gauntlet as a way of issuing a challenge. The person who then picked up the gauntlet did so to indicate his willingness to accept the challenge. The expressions "to throw down the gauntlet" and "to pick up the gauntlet" remain in use today, even though no glove is actually involved.

A gantlet is a form of punishment whereby the victim has to run between two rows of men who have clubs and other weapons with which to strike the victim. Thus the expression "to run the gantlet" has come to mean "to undergo a punishing ordeal." Although many authorities now accept "to run the gauntlet" as the preferred form, a glove has never been involved in the actual punishment. Thus there is good reason to continue to preserve a distinction and write "to run the gantlet."

**Gender–sex.** Use gender to refer to social or cultural characteristics of males and females; for example, gender gap. Use sex to refer to biological characteristics.

> The results of the lab tests have been broken down according to the age and sex of the participants in the study.
>
> See Chart 2–5 for an analysis of Presidential voting patterns on the basis of gender.
>
**NOTE:** In a grammatical context, gender refers to the classification of nouns and pronouns as masculine, feminine, and neuter.

**Gibe–jibe.** A gibe is an insulting or taunting remark. To gibe means "to scoff at." Do not use gibe as a synonym for jibe, which means "to agree."

> The mayor brushed off the gibe, saying he was used to insults at the hands of his political opponents.
>
> Why don't the figures from these two sources jibe? (**NOT:** gibe.)
>
**Go–come.** See *Come–go*.

**Good–well.** Good is an adjective. Well is typically used as an adverb but may be used as an adjective to refer to the state of someone's health.

> Marie got good grades in school. (Adjective.)
>
> I will do the job as well as I can. (Adverb.)
>
**NOTE:** To feel well means "to be in good health." To feel good means "to be in good spirits."

> He admits he does not feel well today. (Adjective.)
>
> The security guards feel good about their new contract. (Adjective.)
>
**Graduated–was graduated.** Both forms are acceptable. However, use from after either expression.

> My daughter graduated from [OR: was graduated from] MIT last year.
>
> (**NOT:** My daughter graduated MIT last year.)
>
**Grow.** Avoid the use of grow as a transitive verb to describe the development of something other than organic matter.

> make the economy grow **OR:** improve economic growth (**RATHER THAN:** grow the economy)
>
> You may, of course, grow roses, for example, or grow tomatoes or grow a beard.
>
**Had better.** This idiomatic phrase means ought to or must. While had is often omitted in speech, be sure to retain it in written material.

> You had better [OR: You'd better] be sure of your facts.
>
> (**NOT:** You better be sure of your facts.)
>
**Hair's breadth.** This expression refers to the width of a single strand of hair, not to the breathing of a rabbit (**NOT:** a hare's breath).

**Harbinger.** A harbinger is someone who initiates a major change or brings news of a change in the future. Despite the sense of "bringing something" that this word conveys, spell the word harbinger (**NOT:** harbringer).

**Hardly.** Hardly is negative in meaning. To preserve the negative meaning, do not use another negative with it.

> You could hardly expect him to agree.
>
> (**NOT:** You couldn't hardly expect him to agree.)
>
**Hare–brained.** This expression refers disparagingly to the mental capacity of a rabbit, not to the intelligence of one's tresses (**NOT:** hair–brained).

**Have–of.** See *Of–have*.

**Healthy–healthful.** People are healthy; a climate or food is healthful.

> You need to move to a *healthful* [**NOT:** healthy] climate.

**Hear–here.** The only time a writer is likely to confuse the meaning of hear ("to perceive by ear") and here ("in this place") is when each word is used twice in succession. Hear! Hear! expresses approval of something a speaker has just said. Here! Here! expresses a rebuke (as in "Here! Here! Let's have no more of that!")

**Help.** Do not use from after the verb help.

> I couldn't help [**NOT:** help from] telling her she was wrong.
>
**Historic–historical.** Historic means "important" or "momentous." Historical means "relating to the past."

> The Fourth of July commemorates a historic event—the adoption of the Declaration of Independence in 1776.
>
> The following article provides a historical account of the events leading up to the adoption of the Declaration of Independence.
>
> For a usage note on a historic occasion vs. an historic occasion, see A–an.
>
**Hoi polloi.** This Greek expression refers to the common people (not to the upper class or the elite, as some people mistakenly assume). Because hoi is the Greek word for the, purists consider the use of the before hoi polloi to be redundant. However, the hoi polloi is now generally considered to be acceptable.

**Home–hone.** One homes in (**NOT:** homes in) on a target. Hone means "to sharpen something"—for example, an axe or one's professional skills.

**Hopefully.** Although the subject of much controversy, the use of hopefully at the beginning of a sentence is no different from the use of obviously, certainly, fortunately, thankfully, actually, apparently, and similar words functioning as independent comments (see ¶138b). These adverbs express the writer's attitude toward what he or she is about to say; as such they modify the meaning of the sentence as a whole rather than a particular word.

> Hopefully, the worst is over and we will soon see a strong upturn in sales and profits.
>
**However.** Beginning a sentence with however is now considered perfectly acceptable. However (like other transitional expressions, such as therefore and moreover) helps readers relate the thought being introduced to the thoughts that went before. Many readers find it more helpful if they encounter the transitional expression at the beginning of the sentence. In that way they can tell at the outset the direction in which the new sentence is proceeding. (See also Therefore.)

However at the start of a sentence can have two meanings: "on the other hand" and "in whatever way." When it means "on the other hand," follow however with a comma to prevent a misreading. Compare these examples:

> However, you decide what you want to say, and we'll back you up. (Insert a comma after however when it means "on the other hand.")
>
> However you decide to organize your presentation, I'm sure it will be a great success. (Use no comma after however when it means "in whatever way.")
>
> In any case, the location of a transitional expression in a sentence must be determined by the individual writer. (For a list of transitional expressions, see ¶138a.)
>
> For the entry But . . . however, see page 368.
>
**I.e.–e.g.** These two abbreviations are often confused, even though they mean entirely different things. I.e. is an abbreviation of the Latin term id est, which means "that is." E.g. is an abbreviation of the Latin term exempli gratia, which means "for example." In formal writing, use that is in place of i.e. and use for example in place of e.g. Although these abbreviations represent Latin phrases, they are considered part of the English language and thus are not italicized in ordinary use.

Always insert a comma after i.e. and e.g. The punctuation that precedes these abbreviations will depend on where they appear in a sentence. See ¶¶181–183 for guidelines and examples of the punctuation that can be used.

**If—whether.** If is often used colloquially for whether in such sentences as "He doesn't know whether he will be able to leave tomorrow." In formal writing, use whether, particularly in such expressions as see whether, determine whether, learn whether, know whether, and doubt whether. Also use whether when the expression or not follows or is implied.

> Find out whether [**NOT:** if] this format is acceptable or not.
>
> Under certain circumstances, the use of whether can communicate a clearer meaning than the use of if.
>
> Please let me know by the end of this week whether or not you want to be listed as a speaker at next month's conference. (The person sending this message clearly wants the recipient to respond one way or another.)
>
> Please let me know if you want to be listed as a speaker at next month's conference. (The recipient of this message might reasonably conclude that a response is called for only if the answer is yes. However, this interpretation would leave the person who sent the message in a quandary. Would the lack of a response clearly mean no?)
>
**Impact.** Do not use impact as a verb unless you really want to convey a sense of a powerful force striking something and producing harsh consequences. Use a simpler, quieter verb like affect instead.

> Any increase in fuel prices could affect [**NOT:** impact] our travel plans this summer.
>
> Any further cuts in the agency's budget will seriously impact [have a destructive effect on] our ability to serve the homeless in this community.
>
**Imply–infer.** Imply means "to suggest"; you imply something by your own words or actions.

> Verna implied [suggested] that we would not be invited.
>
> Infer means "to assume, to deduce, to arrive at a conclusion"; you infer something from another person's words or actions.
>
> I inferred [assumed] from Verna's remarks that we would not be invited.
>
**In–into–in to**

> The correspondence is *in* the file. (*In* implies position within.)
>
> Is there some way we can avoid driving *into* San Jose? (*Into* implies entry.)
>
> Sheila thinks she can turn Brad *into* Mr. Nice Guy. (*Into* implies a change of form.)
>
> All sales reports are to be sent *in to* the sales manager. (*In* is an adverb in the verb phrase *are to be sent in*; *to* is a simple preposition.)
>
> Mr. Boehme came *in to* see me. (*In* is part of the verb phrase *came in*; to is part of the infinitive to see.)

Failing to distinguish carefully between into and in to can create humorous confusion.

> The fugitives turned themselves *in to* FBI agents.
>
> (**NOT:** The fugitives turned themselves *into* FBI agents.)
>
**In behalf of—on behalf of.** *In behalf of* means "for the benefit of"; *on behalf of* means "acting as the agent of."

> This fund-raiser is *in behalf of* [for the benefit of] the victims of last week's flood.
>
> *On behalf of* [acting as the agent of] the company, I want to thank you all for your help.

**Incentivize–incent.** Avoid these recently coined "verbs," which are an objectionable form of jargon.

> **AVOID:** Research shows that profit-sharing plans incent employees to meet their goals.
>
> **BETTER:** Research shows that profit-sharing plans encourage employees to meet their goals.

**Incidentally.** Note that this word ends in *ally*. Never spell it *incidently*.

**Includes–consists of.** See *Consists of–includes*.

**Incredible–incredulous.** *Incredible* means "unbelievable"; *incredulous* means "skeptical, unable to believe something."

> I thought Ralph's account of his whereabouts last night was incredible [unbelievable].
>
> I was incredulous [skeptical] when I heard Ralph's account of his whereabouts last night.
>
**Indifferent–in different**

> She was indifferent [not caring one way or the other] to the offer.
>
> He liked our idea, but he wanted it expressed in different [in other] words.
>
**Indirect–in direct**

> *Indirect* [not direct] lighting will enhance the appearance of this room.
>
> This order is *in direct* [the preposition *in* plus the adjective *direct*] conflict with the policy of this company.
>
**Individual–party–person–people**

Use *individual* to refer to someone whom you wish to distinguish from a larger group of people.

> We wish to honor those *individuals* who had the courage to speak out at a time when popular opinion was defending the status quo.

Use *party* only to refer to someone involved in a legal proceeding.

> All the parties to the original agreement must sign the attached amendment.
>
> Use *person* to refer to a human being in all other contexts.
>
> Please tell me the name of the *person* in charge of your credit department.

If reference is made to more than one *person*, the term *people* usually sounds more natural than the plural form *persons*. In any event, always use *people* when referring to a large group.

> We need to find five more *people* [**RATHER THAN:** persons] to serve on this committee.
>
> If you like, I can send you a list of all the *people* in our corporation who will be attending this year's national convention.

**Infer**

See *Imply–infer*.

**Inflammable–flammable**

See *Flammable–inflammable*.

**In regards to**

Substitute *in regard to*, with *regard to*, *regarding*, or as regards.

> I am writing *in regard to* [**NOT:** in regards to] your letter of May 1.

**Insure**

See *Ensure–insure–assure*.

**Intents–intense**

*Intents* means "aims, goals." *Intense* means "extreme" (as in *intense pain*) or "deeply felt" (as in *an intense discussion of conflicting views*). Because *intense* is pronounced exactly like *intents*, it is sometimes incorrectly used in place of *intents*.

> for all *intents* and purposes (**NOT:** for all intensive purposes)

**Invite–invitation**

Use *invite* only as a verb, never as a noun.

> Do you expect Ron will *invite* you to his retirement party?
>
> Do you expect to be *invited* to Ron's retirement party?
>
> Are you expecting an *invitation* to Ron's party?
>
> (**BUT NOT:** Are you expecting an *invite* to Ron's party?)
>
**Irregardless**

Use *regardless*.

**Is where–is when**

Do not use these phrases to introduce definitions.

> A dilemma is a situation *in which* you have to choose between equally unsatisfactory alternatives.
>
> (**NOT:** A dilemma is *where* you have to choose between equally unsatisfactory alternatives.)

However, these phrases may be correctly used in other situations.

> The Ritz-Carlton *is where* the dinner-dance will be held this year.
>
> Two o'clock *is when* the meeting is scheduled to begin.
>
**Its–it's.** See ¶1056e.

**It's me.** *It's me* is acceptable in colloquial speech and informal writing. To be grammatically correct, one should say *It is I*, but this would produce much the same effect as changing the name of *Toys "R" Us to Toys "R" We*. (See also the note to ¶1054b.)

**Jibe–gibe.** See *Gibe–jibe*.

**Journal.** The use of *journal* as a verb is a matter of taste. Those who record their thoughts in a journal every day are likely to endorse using *journal* as a verb; those who don't probably won't.

**Key–type.** See Type–key.

**Kind.** Kind is singular; therefore, write this kind, that kind, these kinds, those kinds (BUT **NOT:** these kind, those kind). The same distinctions hold for class, type, and sort.

**Kind of–sort of.** These phrases are sometimes followed by an adjective (for example, kind of sorry, sort of baffled). Use this kind of expression only in informal writing. In more formal situations, use rather or somewhat (rather sorry, somewhat baffled).

> I was *somewhat* [**NOT:** kind of, sort of] surprised.
>
> She seemed *rather* [**NOT:** *kind of*, *sort of*] tired.

**NOTE:** When *kind of* or *sort of* is followed by a noun, the expression is appropriate in all kinds of situations.

> What *sort of* business is Vern Forbes in?
>
> What *kind of* expression is that?

→ *See A–of and Kind of a*.

**Kind of a.** The a is unnecessary.

> That kind of [**NOT:** kind of a] car is very expensive.
>
**Kudos.** Kudos, a Greek word meaning "praise," is a singular word, but because of the s ending, kudos is often mistakenly assumed to be a plural noun that requires a plural verb when it is the subject of a sentence. This mistake has led to a further mistake (now accepted by many dictionaries): the assumption that kudo is the singular form of kudos. Do not use kudo (despite what the dictionaries say), and do not use kudos as a plural noun. In fact, avoid the use of kudos altogether and use praise instead.

**Lactose–intolerant.** Lactose is a type of sugar that is found in milk. To be lactose–intolerant is to be unable to digest anything containing lactose. People who are unfamiliar with this term might be tempted to write "lack toast and tolerant." They should resist the temptation.

**Landlubber.** Although this term refers to someone who loves being on land rather than on water, it is spelled landlubber (**NOT:** land lover).

**Last–latest.** These two adjectives are commonly distinguished in this way: *last* means "coming after all others" or "final"; *latest* means "most recent."

> Mr. Lin's *last* act [his final act] before leaving was to recommend Ms. Roth's promotion.
>
> Attached is the *latest* report [the most recent report] we have received from the Southern Region.
>
> In actual usage, however, *last* can also mean "most recent," especially in references to time (for example, *last night*, *last week*, *last month*, *last year*). In some cases, the meaning of *last* can be ambiguous unless clarified by the context.
>
> I thoroughly enjoyed Nelson's *last* book. (Did Nelson never write another book after this one, or was this simply his most recent book, with others likely to be written in the future? One way to avoid ambiguity here is to replace *last book* with *final book* or *most recent book*, depending on the meaning intended.)
>
**Latter–last.** *Latter* refers to the second of two persons or things mentioned. When more than two are mentioned, use *last*. (See also *Former—first*.)

> July and August are good vacation months, but the *latter* is more popular.
>
> June, July, and August are good vacation months, but the *last* is the most popular.
>
**Lawyer–attorney.** See Attorney–lawyer.

**Lay–lie.** *Lay* (principal parts: *lay*, *laid*, *laid*, *laying*) means "to put" or "to place." This verb requires an object to complete its meaning.

> Please *lay* the *boxes* on the pallets with extreme care.
>
> I *laid* the *message* right on your desk.
>
> I *had laid* two other *notes* there yesterday.
>
> He *is* always *laying* the *blame* on his assistants. (Putting the blame.)
>
> The dress *was laid* in the box. (A passive construction implying that someone *laid* the dress in the box.)
>
> Lie (principal parts: *lie*, *lay*, *lain*, *lying*) means "to recline, rest, or stay" or "to take a position of rest." It refers to a person or thing as either assuming or being in a reclining position. This verb cannot be used with an object.
>
> Now he *lies* in bed most of the day.
>
> The mountains *lay* before us as we proceeded west.
>
> This letter *has lain* unanswered for two weeks.
>
> Today's mail *is lying* on the receptionist's desk.
>
**TEST:** In deciding whether to use *lie* or *lay* in a sentence, substitute the word *place*, *placed*, or *placing* (as appropriate) for the word in question. If the substitute fits, the corresponding form of *lay* is correct. If it doesn't, use the appropriate form of *lie*.

> I will (*lie* or *lay*?) down now. (You could not say, "I will *place* down now." Therefore, write "I will *lie* down now.")
>
> I (*laid* or *lay*?) the pad on his desk. ("I *placed* the pad on his desk" works. Therefore, write "I *laid* the pad on his desk.")
>
> I (*laid* or *lay*?) awake many nights. ("I *placed* awake" doesn't work. Write "I *lay* awake.")
>
> These files have (*laid* or *lain*?) untouched for some time. ("These files have *placed* untouched" does not work. Write "These files have *lain* untouched.")
>
> He has been (*laying* or *lying*?) down on the job. ("He has been *placing* down on the job" does not work. Write "He has been *lying* down.")
>
**NOTE:** When the verb *lie* means "to tell a falsehood," it has regularly formed principal parts (*lie, lied, lied, lying*) and is seldom confused with the verbs just described.

**Lay down—lie down.** You can *lay down the law*, you can *lay down your life for another*, you can *lay down your arms*, and you can *lay down your cards*. You can even *lay yourself down*. But you cannot simply *lay down*. In every one of these acceptable examples, note that *lay down* takes an object (*law, life, arms, cards, yourself*).

You can *lie down on a bed*, you can *lie down on the job*, and you can *lie down with dogs* (but then you are likely to get up with fleas). You can even simply *lie down*, because this verb phrase does not require an object. It is, however, often followed by a prepositional phrase (*on a bed, on the job, with dogs*). For more on the proper use of these phrases, see *Lay—lie* above.

**Learn–teach.** *Learn* (principal parts: *learn, learned, learned, learning*) means "to acquire knowledge." *Teach* (principal parts: *teach, taught, taught, teaching*) means "to impart knowledge to others."

> I *learned* from a master teacher.
>
> A first-rate instructor *taught* me how.
>
> (**NOT:** I was learned by a master teacher.)
>
> I was taught by a first-rate instructor.
>
**Leave–let.** *Leave* (principal parts: *leave, left, left, leaving*) means "to move away, abandon, or depart." *Let* (principal parts: *let, let, let, letting*) means "to permit or allow." **TEST:** In deciding whether to use *let* or *leave*, substitute the appropriate form of *permit*. If *permit* fits, use *let*; if not, use *leave*.

> I now *leave* you to your own devices. (Abandon you.)
>
> Mr. Morales *left* on the morning train. (Departed.)
>
> *Let* me see the last page. (Permit me to see.)
>
> The expressions "Leave me alone" and "Let me alone" are both acceptable and are commonly considered to have the same meaning. However, some authorities suggest a slight difference between them: "leave me alone" is said to express the wish to be entirely by oneself, for someone else to withdraw; "let me alone" is said to express the wish not to have one's plans or actions interfered with.
>
**Lectern–podium.** See *Podium–lectern*.

**Lend–borrow.** You lend money *to* someone; you borrow money *from* someone. Do not use *borrow* as a synonym for *lend*.

> I *lent* Paul enough money to cover this month's rent.
>
> (**NOT:** I borrowed Paul enough money to cover this month's rent.)
>
**Lend–loan.** Although *lend* and *loan* have long been used as verbs, it is preferable to use *loan* only as a noun.

> Hal has asked for a *loan* of $500, and I'll be glad to *lend* it to him.
>
> (**RATHER THAN:** I'll be glad to *loan* it to him.)
>
**Less–fewer.** See *Fewer–less*.

**Less than.** See *More than–over–nearly–almost–less than–about–around*.

**Let–let's.** A pronoun that follows the verb let must be in the objective case.

> Let him who created this mess be the one to clean it up.
>
> (**NOT:** Let he who created this mess be the one to clean it up.)
>
> Let's is a contraction of let us. Since us is an objective form, any pronouns that refer to let's also have to be in the objective case.
>
> Let's you and me try to work out a compromise we can both live with.
>
> (**NOT:** Let's you and I try to work out a compromise we can both live with.)
>
> If you feel that "Let's you and me" sounds awkward, simply omit "you and me."
>
> Let's try to work out a compromise we can both live with.
>
> It is true that T. S. Eliot began a famous poem with these words: "Let us go then, you and I." Those of us who are not highly acclaimed poets, however, need to follow the standard grammatical guideline, which calls for pronouns to agree with their antecedents.
>
**Libel–slander.** Defaming a person in writing is considered an act of libel. Using spoken words to defame a person is considered an act of slander.

**Lie–lay.** See Lay–lie.

**Lie down–lay down.** See Lay down–lie down.

**Like–as–as if.** Like is correctly used as a preposition. Although like is also widely used as a conjunction in colloquial speech, use as, as if, or a similar expression in written material.

> We need to hire another person like you.
>
> Kate, like her predecessor, will have to cope with the problem.
>
> As I told you earlier, we will not reorder for six months.
>
> (**NOT:** Like I told you earlier, we will not reorder for six months.)
>
> It looks like snow.
>
> It looks as if it will snow.
>
> (**NOT:** It looks like it will snow.)
>
> Mary looks like her mother.
>
> Mary looks as her mother did at the same age.
>
> **OR:** Mary looks the way her mother did at the same age.
>
> (BUT **NOT:** Mary looks like her mother did at the same age.)
>
> **COLLOQUIAL USAGE:** Ann Richards, former Governor of Texas, made this observation on the role of women in today's society: "Like we say in Texas, the roosters may crow but the hens deliver the goods."
>
**NOTE:** When using like as a preposition, be alert to the possibility that your reader could mistakenly interpret like as a verb on first encounter.

> **CONFUSING:** Part of our mission is to make people like lawmakers more sensitive to the needs of those without medical insurance.
>
> **CLEAR:** Part of our mission is to make lawmakers and others more sensitive to the needs of those without medical insurance.
>
**Literally.** This adverb means "actually, truly." Do not use it in the sense of "almost" to modify a reference to an exaggerated or unreal situation.

> **NOT:** When Jensen got the bill for all the "minor changes" made at the last minute, he *literally* hit the ceiling. (Omit the word *literally* or change it to *almost* unless Jensen actually exploded out of his chair and hit the ceiling headfirst.)
>
**Livid.** *Livid* means "pale or ashen," not "red or flushed with anger."

**Loan–lend.** See *Lend–loan*.

**Log on to–log onto.** One logs *on to* a computer. (One does not log *onto* a computer.)

**Look forward to.** In this phrase *to* is a preposition and should be followed by a gerund (a verbal noun ending in *ing*) or some other type of noun. Do not mistake *to* in this phrase for the start of an infinitive to be followed by a verb.

> I look forward to *meeting* you next Friday. (*Meeting* is a gerund, serving as the object of the preposition *to*.)
>
> **OR:** I look forward to our *meeting* next Friday. (*Meeting* here is an ordinary noun, serving as the object of the preposition *to*.)
>
> BUT **NOT:** I look forward to *meet* you next Friday. (Do not use an infinitive after *look forward*.)
>
**Maiden name.** Replace this obsolete term with *birth name* or *original name*.

**Majority–plurality.** A *majority* means "more than half the total." A *plurality* means "more than the next highest number (but not more than half)."

> Edna Welling received a *majority* of the votes in her district. (She received more than 50 percent of the total votes cast.)
>
> Victor Soros won the election by a *plurality*. (He received 43 percent of the total votes cast; his two opponents received 31 percent and 26 percent respectively.)
>
**Manner–manor.** Do not use *manor* (which refers to an estate) in place of *manner* (which refers to a way of acting) in expressions such as *to the manner born* and *bedside manner*.

**Masterly–masterful.** *Masterly* means "skillful." The primary meaning of *masterful* is "domineering, overpowering," but over the years it has acquired the meaning of "skillful" as well. To avoid ambiguity, use *masterful* only in its primary sense.

> Margaret has a *masterly* [skillful] command of grammar, style, and usage.
>
> Shawna is a *masterful* [domineering] presence at any meeting she attends.
>
**May–can (might–could).** *May* and *might* imply permission or possibility; *can* and *could*, ability or power.

> You *may* send them a dozen cans of paint on trial. (Permission.)
>
> The report *may* [OR: *might*] be true. (Possibility.)
>
> Can he present a workable plan? (Has he the ability?)
>
> The CEO could change this policy if he wanted to. (Power.)
>
> Please call me if you think I can be of any help. (Emphasizes the ability to help.)
>
> Please call me if you think I may be of any help. (Emphasizes the possibility of helping.)
>
**NOTE:** When it is important to maintain sequence of tenses, use may to express the present and might to express the past. (See ¶1047.)

> I think [present] that I may go to Australia next winter.
>
> I thought [past] that I might go to Australia next winter.
>
> Under certain circumstances may and might convey different meanings. Consider the following examples:
>
> The CFO's reorganization plan may have saved the company from bankruptcy. (Other factors may also have contributed to the outcome, but the company is still a going concern.)
>
> The CFO's reorganization plan might have saved the company from bankruptcy. (However, the CFO's plan was not implemented, and the company did fail.)
>
> Might also may be used in place of may to create a greater sense of uncertainty. Telling someone that you might decide to go to graduate school is not quite as strong as saying that you may decide to go to graduate school.
>
**Maybe–may be.** *Maybe* is an adverb; *may be* is a verb.

> If we don't receive a letter from them today, *maybe* [an adverb meaning "perhaps"] we should give them a call.
>
> Mr. Boston *may be* [a verb] out of town next week.
>
**Media.** *Media*, referring to various channels of communication and advertising, is a plural noun. *Medium* is the singular.

**NOTE:** Under special circumstances *media* may be considered a singular noun. (See ¶1018c.)

**Might.** See *May–can* (*might–could*).

**Moot point.** This expression originally referred to something that is debatable or open to discussion. In fact, a *moot case* is a hypothetical case that law students still argue in a moot court as a way of developing their legal skills. Over time the term *moot* has come to mean "hypothetical, academic, of no practical significance," and *moot point* has come to mean something totally opposite to its original meaning. Now *moot point* is widely considered to refer to something not worth discussing because it lacks any practical significance. Although some authorities consider this shift in meaning to be an error, this new meaning has become so well established that the original meaning of *moot point* is now often overlooked. Since there is always the possibility of ambiguity, it may be better to avoid this expression and simply say that a given point is debatable or not worth discussing.

**More.** In some sentences it may not be clear whether *more* is being used to form the comparative degree of an adjective (for example, *more experienced*) or is being used as an adjective meaning "a greater number of." In such cases reword to avoid confusion.

> **CONFUSING:** We need to hire more experienced workers. (A greater number of experienced workers? Or workers who are more experienced than those now on staff?)
>
> **CLEAR:** We need to hire a greater number of experienced workers.
>
> **CLEAR:** We need to hire workers who are *more* experienced.

If rewording is not feasible, insert a hyphen between *more* and an adjective to make it clear that you are forming the comparative degree of the adjective.

> We need to hire more–experienced workers. (That is, workers who are more experienced.)

→ *For a usage note on fewer–less, see page 379*.

**More important—more importantly.** *More important* is often used as a short form for "what is more important," especially at the beginning of a sentence. *More importantly* means "in a more important manner."

> *More important,* we need to establish a line of credit very quickly. (What is more important.)
>
> The incident was treated *more importantly* than it deserved. (In a more important manner.)
>
**More than–over–nearly–almost–less than–about–around.** These expressions represent alternative ways to express *approximate numbers*—that is, round numbers used in place of actual or more precise numbers. (See ¶413a, note.)

Use *more than* or *over* with an approximate number to emphasize that the actual number is larger.

> Our fall catalog brought in *more than* $400,000 in sales.
>
> How could you lose *over* $80,000 in the stock market?

In some situations—especially involving age—*more than* is not appropriate.

> These provisions apply only to people *over* 50.

When the approximate number is not as great as the actual number, use *nearly* or *almost* when you want to put a positive spin on the approximate number. Use *less than* when you want to emphasize that the approximate number is not quite as large as the actual number.

> Although we missed our sales goal, we still managed to rake in *almost* $5.5 million.
>
> Your results last year were disappointing. Your sales totaled *less than* $5.5 million.
>
> Use *about* or *around* when you want to present an approximate number without any spin at all.
>
> We managed to do *about* $5.5 million in sales last year.
>
**Most.** Do not use *most* for *almost*.

> *Almost all* the money is gone.
>
> **OR:** *Most* of the money is gone.
>
> (BUT **NOT:** *Most all* of the money is gone.)
>
**Nearly.** See *More than—over—nearly—almost—less than—about—around*.

**Nobody–no body**

> There was *nobody* [no person] at the information desk when I arrived.
>
> *No body* [no group] of employees is more cooperative than yours. (Spell *no body* as two words when it is followed by *of*. See also ¶1010.)
>
**None–no one.** See ¶1013.

**Not so . . . as.** See *As . . . as*–*not so . . . as*.

**Notoriety–celebrity.** See *Celebrity–notoriety*.

**Number.** See *Amount–number*.

**Of–a.** See *A–of*.

**Of–have.** Do not use *of* instead of *have* in verb forms. The correct forms are *could have*, *would have*, *should have*, *might have*, *may have*, *must have*, *ought to have*, and so forth.

> What *could have* happened? (**NOT:** What could of happened?)

The words *could have*, *would have*, and *should have* sometimes appear deliberately misspelled in the colloquial phrase *coulda*, *woulda*, *shoulda*. (The phrase also appears with the words presented in a different order and sometimes linked with hyphens instead of separated by commas.)

> The problem with those *coulda*, *woulda*, *shoulda* people is that they make all sorts of promises and then deliver excuses instead of results.
>
> **OR:** The problem with those *woulda–shoulda–coulda* people is that they make all sorts of promises and then deliver excuses instead of results.
>
**Off.** Do not use *off of* or *off from* in place of *off*. (See also ¶1078.)

> The papers fell *off* the desk. (**NOT:** off of the desk.)
>
**Off–from.** See *From–off*.

## On–onto–on to

> It's dangerous to drive *on* the shoulder. (*On* is a preposition that implies movement over.)
>
> He lost control of the car and drove *onto* the sidewalk. (*Onto* is a preposition that implies movement toward and then over.)

Failing to distinguish carefully between *into* and *in to* can create humorous confusion.

> The fugitives turned themselves *in to* FBI agents.
>
> (**NOT:** The fugitives turned themselves *into* FBI agents.)
>
## On–upon–up on

> His statements were based on [OR: upon] experimental data. (On and upon are interchangeable.)
>
> Please follow up on the case. (Up is part of the verb phrase follow up; on is a preposition.)
>
> The district attorney's whole case hangs on [OR: upon] the testimony of one witness.
>
> Don't let yourself get hung up on a small detail like that. (Up is part of the verb phrase hung up; on is a preposition.)
>
**On account of.** See Due to–because of–on account of.

**On behalf of–in behalf of.** See In behalf of–on behalf of.

**One another—each other.** See Each other—one another.

**Only.** The adverb *only* can be negative in meaning. Therefore, do not use another negative with it. (See ¶1072.)

> I use this letterhead *only* for formal matters. (I do not use this letterhead for anything else.)
>
> **BUT**: I do not use this letterhead *only* for formal matters. (I use it for other things too.)
>
**Opposite.** When used as a noun, *opposite* is followed by *of*.

> Her opinion is the *opposite of mine*.
>
> In other uses, *opposite* is followed by *to* or *from* or by no preposition at all.
>
> Her opinion is *opposite to* [OR: from] mine. She lives *opposite* the school.
>
**Out loud.** See *Aloud—out loud*.

**Over—more than.** See *More than—over—nearly—almost—less than—about—around*.

**Parameter.** This technical term has now acquired two meanings in general usage. It may refer to a variable factor, the value of which has to be established in specific calculations.

> With these basic formulas in place, you can change any *parameter* [OR: any of these parameters] and immediately see the effects on the bottom line.
>
> The plural form, *parameters*, can also mean "limits, boundaries."
>
> We must establish the *parameters* [limits] of this research project before we can draw up detailed plans.
>
**Party—people.** See *Individual—party—person—people*.

**Per—a.** *Per*, a Latin word, is often used to mean "by the," as in *28 miles per gallon (mpg)* or *55 miles per hour (mph)*. Whenever possible, substitute *a* or *an*; for example, *at the rate of $8 an hour, 75 cents a liter*. *Per* must be retained, of course, in Latin phrases—for example, *per diem* (by the day) *OR*: *per capita* (for each person; literally, by the head).

**NOTE:** Do not use *per* or *as per* in the sense of "according to" or "in accordance with."

> We are sending you the samples *you requested*. (**NOT:** as per your request.)
>
**Percent—percentage.** In ordinary usage, *percent* should always be accompanied by a number; for example, *20 percent, 0.5 percent, 150 percent*. In a table, a column of figures representing percentages may be headed *Percent of Total* or something comparable. In all other cases, use the term *percentage*.

> A large *percentage* of the calls we got yesterday came from customers who misread our ad. (**NOT:** A large *percent* of the calls . . .)
>
> What *percentage* of our subscribers are in the 30–49 age group? (See ¶1025.)
>
**NOTE:** In the percentage formula used in mathematics (base × rate = amount), the rate is called a *percent* and the amount is called a *percentage*. Thus you might be asked to calculate the *percentage* when a sales tax of 6 percent (the rate) is applied to a purchase of $50 (the base). By the same token, you might be asked to calculate the *percent* (the rate) if you know that a tax of $5 (the amount, or percentage) has been paid on an order of $200. Apart from this special context, *percent* and *percentage* should be used as noted above.

**Percent–percentage points.** Consider the difference in meaning in the following examples.

> Our sales this quarter were up by 10 percent—from 5 to 5.5 percent.
>
> Our sales this quarter were up by 10 percentage points—from 5 to 15 percent.
>
**Period ended–period ending.** When referring to a period of time that is already in the past, write period ended. When the period in question has not yet ended, write period ending.

> Enclosed are the sales figures for the period ended June 30. (It is now July.)
>
> Here are my sales projections for the period ending December 31. (It is only September.)
>
**Person–people.** See Individual–party–person–people.

**Persuade–convince.** See Convince–persuade.

**Plurality–majority.** See Majority–plurality.

**Plus.** Plus can be correctly used as a noun, an adjective, or a preposition. However, do not use it as a conjunction (with the sense of "and").

> Your presence at the hearing was a real plus for our cause. (Plus used correctly as a noun.)
>
> The decision to offer a 10 percent discount on all orders received by June 1 was a plus factor in the campaign. (Plus used correctly as an adjective.)
>
> Your willingness to innovate plus your patient perspective on profits has permitted this company to grow at an astonishing rate. (Plus used correctly as a preposition. Note that a plus phrase following the subject of a sentence does not affect the number of the verb. See ¶1007.)
>
> BUT **NOT:** You have always been willing to innovate, plus you have been patient about the profits to be derived from the innovations. (Do not use plus as a conjunction; use and instead.)
>
**Podium–lectern.** A podium is a raised platform on which a speaker stands to speak or a conductor stands to conduct. A lectern (**NOT:** lectern) is a stand on which a book, a script, or other materials are placed for the benefit of a person standing to read or speak to a group.

**Preventive–preventative.** Although these words have the same meaning, preventive is preferred because it is the shorter form and the one more commonly used.

> We need to take some preventive [**RATHER THAN:** preventative] action before sales drop further.
>
**Principle–principal.** The word principle can be used only as a noun. It can mean "a basic law or rule" (a key principle of economics) or "faithful adherence to a code of ethics" (a person of principle, a matter of principle). The derivative adjective principled also refers to adherence to an ethical code (a principled politician).

The word principal can serve as a noun or an adjective. As a noun, it may refer to a business owner or a partner (a principal in the firm), the head of a school (appointed principal of Edison Middle School), or a sum of invested money (receiving an excellent return on my principal). As an adjective, principal means "the most important" (my principal reason for quitting, the principal parts of a verb).

**Proved–proven.** Use proven only as a modifier before a noun. Otherwise, use proved.

> Here is a proven remedy for your condition.
>
> This remedy has proved [**NOT:** proven] to be extremely effective.
>
**Rack–wrack.** The words rack and wrack have been used interchangeably so often in certain contexts that some authorities now regard wrack as a spelling variant of rack. However, careful writers will want to respect the traditional distinction in usage.

> to rack one's brains
> a storm-wracked island
> a nerve-racking encounter
> a business wracked by heavy losses
> to be racked with pain
> let the property go to wrack and ruin
>
**Raise–rise.** Raise (principal parts: raise, raised, raised, raising) means "to cause to lift" or "to lift something." This verb requires an object to complete its meaning.

> Mr. Pinelli raises a good question.
>
> Most growers have raised the price of coffee.
>
> We are raising money for the United Fund.
>
> Our rent has been raised. (A passive construction implying that someone has raised the rent.)
>
> Rise (principal parts: rise, rose, risen, rising) means "to ascend," "to move upward by itself," or "to get up." This verb cannot be used with an object.
>
> We will have to rise to the demands of the occasion.
>
> The sun rose at 6:25 this morning.
>
> The river has risen to flood level.
>
> The temperature has been rising all day.
>
**TEST:** Remember, you cannot "rise" anything.

**Real–really.** Real is an adjective; really, an adverb. Do not use real to modify another adjective; use very or really.

> One taste will tell you these cookies were made with real butter. (Adjective.)
>
> We were really expecting a lower price from you this year. (Adverb.)
>
> BUT: It was very nice **OR:** really nice [**NOT:** real nice] to see you and your family again.
>
**Reason is because.** Replace because with that.

> The reason for such low sales is that [**NOT:** because] prices are too high.
>
**Refer–allude.** See Allude–refer.

**Reign–rein.** The verb reign (meaning "to rule over") is often misused in place of rein (meaning "to hold back, restrain, stop"). A newly installed head of state will reign supreme, but someone who replaces an existing head of state may be said to seize the reins of power. Be sure to use rein in an expression such as to rein in runaway health insurance costs. And just as one might give free rein to a horse, one should give free rein to brainstorming colleagues or to one's own imagination if one hopes to come up with good ideas worth pursuing.

**Reluctant–reticent.** Reluctant means "disinclined," "unwilling," or "hesitant." Reticent means "inclined to be silent." Although some dictionaries now show reticent as a synonym for reluctant, careful writers and speakers will avoid this usage.

> I am reluctant [**NOT:** reticent] to agree to these changes in the contract.
>
> Phil was reticent when you asked what he thought of the CEO's speech.
>
**Retroactive to.** After retroactive use to (**NOT:** from).

> These improvements in benefits under the company dental plan will be retroactive to July 1. (See also ¶1077.)
>
**Rights–rites.** Rights are special privileges that individuals or institutions are entitled to—for example, civil rights, human rights, patients' rights, the Bill of Rights. Rites are special ceremonies—for example, initiation rites, last rites, rites of passage.

**Rise–raise.** See Raise–rise.

**Sacrilegious.** This term means "acting in a way that is harmful to something sacred." Because of the relationship between things that are sacred and religion, some writers are tempted to misspell this word as "sacreligious." Note that the correct spelling is sacrilegious.

**Said.** Avoid the use of said or above as an adjective (as in the said document or the above document), especially in legal writing, where this usage still tends to persist. There are a number of alternatives readily at hand. You could write this document, that document, or the document cited above; you could even use a shortened name to refer to the document. (See also Above.)

**Same.** Do not use same to refer to a previously mentioned thing.

> We are now processing your order and will have it ready for you Monday.
>
> (**NOT:** We are now processing your order and will have same ready . . .)
>
**Scarcely.** The adverb scarcely is negative in meaning. To preserve the negative meaning, do not use another negative with it. (See ¶1072 for the placement of scarcely.)

> I scarcely recognized [**NOT:** didn't scarcely recognize] you.
>
**Scots–Scottish–Scotch.** To refer to the people of Scotland, use the Scots or the Scottish. As a general rule, use Scottish (rather than Scotch) as an adjective; for example, the Scottish language, Scottish weather, Scottish culture. Restrict the use of Scotch to well-established expressions; for example, Scotch egg, Scotch pine, Scotch tape, Scotch terrier, Scotch whisky. (Whiskey is normally spelled with an e, but the e is omitted when the word is preceded by Scotch.)

**Seize–cease.** See Cease–seize.

**Semiannual.** See Biannual–biennial–semiannual.

**Serve–service.** Things can be serviced, but people are served.

> We take great pride in the way we serve [**NOT:** service] our clients.
>
> For a small additional charge we will service the equipment for a full year.
>
**Set–sit.** Set (principal parts: set, set, set, setting) means "to place something somewhere"; in this sense, set requires an object to complete its meaning. Sit (principal parts: sit, sat, sat, sitting) means "to be in a position of rest" or "to be seated." This verb cannot be used with an object. REMEMBER: You cannot "sit" anything.

> It's important to set down your recollections while they are still fresh.
>
> I must have dropped my wallet when I set my suitcase down.
>
> I have set my alarm for six in the morning.
>
> The crew was setting the stage for the evening performance.
>
> The date was set some time ago. (A passive construction implying that someone set the date.)
>
> So here we sit, waiting for a decision from top management.
>
> I sat next to Ebbetsen at the board meeting.
>
> I don't think we can solve this problem right away. We'll have to let it sit for a while.

**NOTE:** Set has a few other meanings in which the verb does not require an object, but these meanings are seldom confused with sit.

> They set out on the trip in high spirits.
>
> The sun set at 5:34 p.m. Wednesday.
>
> Allow a full hour for the mixture to set.
>
**Sex–gender.** See Gender–sex.

**Shall–will.** The helping verb shall has given way to the verb will in all but the most formal writing and speech. The following rules reflect both ordinary and formal usage.

**a.** To express simple future time:

**(1)** In *ordinary* circumstances use *will* with all three persons.

> I [**OR:** *we*] *will* be glad to help you plan the program.
>
> You will want to study these recommendations before the meeting.
>
> *He* [**OR:** *she*, *it*, *they*] *will* arrive tomorrow morning.

**(2)** In formal circumstances use *shall* with the first person (*I*, *we*) and *will* with the second and third persons (*you*, *he*, *she*, *it*, *they*).

> I [OR: we] shall be glad to answer all inquiries promptly.
>
> You will meet the McGinnesses at the reception this evening.
>
> They [OR: he, she] *will* not find the trip too tiring.

**b.** To indicate *determination*, *promise*, *desire*, *choice*, or *threat*:

- In *ordinary* circumstances use *will* with all three persons.

- In *formal* circumstances use *will* for the first person (*I*, *we*) and *shall* for the second and third persons (you, he, she, it, they).

> In spite of the risk, I will go where I please. (Determination.)
>
> They *shall* not interfere with my department. (Determination.)
>
> I *will* send my check by the end of the week. (Promise.)
>
> We *will* report you to the authorities if this is true. (Threat.)
>
> You *shall* regret your answer. (Threat.)
>
> He *shall* study or he shall leave college. (Threat.)

**c.** To indicate willingness (to be willing, to be agreeable to) in both ordinary and formal circumstances, use will with all persons.

> Yes, I *will* meet you at six o'clock.

**Shoo–in.** This expression, which refers to an easy winner, is spelled *shoo-in* (**NOT**: shoe-in).

**Shot across the bow.** This expression refers to a shot over the bow of a ship (**NOT**: over the bough of a tree).

**Should–would.** *Should* and *would* follow the same rules as *shall* and *will* (see preceding entry) in expressions of future time, determination, and willingness. The distinctions concerning ordinary and formal usage also apply here.

> **ORDINARY:** I *would* like to hear from you.
>
> **FORMAL:** I *should* like to hear from you.
>
> **ORDINARY:** We *would* be glad to see her.
>
> **FORMAL:** We *should* be glad to see her.
>
> **ORDINARY:** I *would* be pleased to serve on that committee.
>
> **FORMAL:** I *should* be pleased to serve on that committee.

**a.** Always use *should* in all persons to indicate "ought to."
> I *should* study tonight.
>
> You *should* report his dishonesty to the manager.
>
> He *should* pay his debts.

**b.** Always use *would* in all persons to indicate customary action.
> Every day I *would* swim half a mile.
>
> Time and again they *would* only say, "No comment."
>
> She *would* practice day after day.

**c.** Use should in all three persons to express a condition in an if clause.

> If I *should* win the prize, I will share it with you.
>
> If you *should* miss the train, please call me collect.

**d.** Use *would* in all three persons to express willingness in an *if* clause.

> If he *would* apply himself, he could win top honors easily.
>
> If you *would* delay your decision, I could offer you more attractive terms.

**Should have—should of.** See *Of—have*.

**Since.** *Since* has two meanings: it can refer to some point of time in the past, or it can mean "because."

> *Since* [from the time that] we last talked, I've found a much better job at another company.
>
> Since [because] I will be traveling for the next two weeks, please hold my mail until I return.

Ordinarily, the context makes it clear which meaning is intended, but reword in cases where the use of *since* could cause confusion.

> **AMBIGUOUS:** Barbara has had no luck in finding a good job since she dropped out of college. (Has she simply remained without a good job *ever sinc*e she dropped out of college, or has she not found a good job because she dropped out of college?)
>
> **CLEAR:** Barbara has had no luck in finding a good job *ever since* she dropped out of college.
>
> **CLEAR:** Barbara has had no luck in finding a good job, *because* she dropped out of college.
>
**Sit—set.** See *Set—sit*.

**Slander—libel.** See *Libel—slander*.

**So—so that.** *So* as a conjunction means "therefore"; *so that* means "in order that."

> The work is now finished, *so* you can all go home. (See also ¶179.)
>
> Please finish what you are doing so that we can all go home.

**Soft-pedal–back-pedal.** *Soft-Pedal* literally means "to use the soft pedal on the piano while playing." It has come to mean "to play down, to de-emphasize." Because the term also carries the sense of trying not to give someone a hard-sell, it is easy to understand why some writers are tempted to misspell this term as "soft-peddle." The correct spelling is *soft-pedal*.

By the same token, the term *back-pedal* takes its origin from bicycle riding, not from peddling.

**Someday—some day**

> Please set up a meeting with Al and Jerry *someday* [on an unspecified day] next week.
>
> **BUT**: Please set up a meeting with Al and Jerry *for some day* next week. (Two words when used as the object of a preposition such as *for*.)

**Someone—some one.**

*See ¶1010, note*.

**Sometime—sometimes—some time**

> The order will be shipped *sometime* [at some unspecified time] next week.
>
> *Sometimes* [now and then] reports are misleading.
>
> It took me *some time* [a period of time] to complete the job.
>
> I saw him *some time* ago [a long time ago].
>
**NOTE:** Spell *some time* as two words when the term follows a preposition.

> We will be happy to reconsider your proposal at *some time* in the future.
>
> I've been thinking about retiring for *some time*.

**Sort.** See *Kind*.

**Sort of—kind of.** See *Kind of—sort of*.

**Spitting image.** To say that someone is "the spitting image of his father" is to emphasize how much the son looks like his father. The original form of this expression was *spit and image*, in which *spit* meant "the exact likeness" and not "saliva." This expression was corrupted over time to become "the spitting image." Until recently the corrupted form was considered an error, but thanks to the frequency with which it has been used, it has become the acceptable form. *Spit and image* is now considered obsolete.

**Such as . . . etc.** See *Etc.–et al*.

**Such as—like.** See *Like—such as*.

**Supposed to.** Be sure to spell *supposed* with a *d*.

> Under the circumstances what was I *supposed* to think? (**NOT:** suppose to.)

**Sure—surely.** *Sure* is an adjective, surely an adverb.

> I am *sure* that I did not make that mistake. (Adjective.)
>
> You can *surely* count on our help. (Adverb.)
>
> Do not use *sure* as an adverb; use *surely* or very.
>
> I was *very glad* to be of help. (**NOT:** sure glad.)
>
**Sure and.** In written material use *sure to* in place of the colloquial *sure and*.

> Be *sure to* give them my best regards. (**NOT:** Be *sure and* give them my best regards.)

**Tack–tact.** Use *tack* (**NOT:** tact) in the expression *to take a different tack* (meaning "to move in a different direction"). *Tact* means "a considerate way of behaving so as to avoid offending others."

> We may have to take a different *tack* in our negotiations with Firebridge.
>
> Please use a great deal of *tact* when you reply to Korbman's letter.

**Take–bring.** See *Bring–take*.

**Teach–learn.** See *Learn–teach*.

**Tenterhooks.** Anyone in a state of suspense may be said to be on tenterhooks (**NOT:** tenderhooks).

**Than–then.** *Than* is a conjunction introducing a dependent clause of comparison. *Then* is an adverb meaning "at that time" or "next."

> The compulsory retirement age is higher now *than* it was then.
>
> They then asserted that they could handle the account better *than* we. (See ¶1057 for the case of pronouns following *than*.)

**NOTE:** Remember that *then* (like *when*) refers to time.

**Thank you in advance.** Authorities tend to agree that it's inappropriate to thank someone before that person has actually done something to merit your thanks. To thank someone in advance gratuitously assumes that the person will be certain to grant your request. However, that person may not be able or willing to do what you want. As one alternative, you could write "I will be very grateful for [OR: I will very much appreciate] any help that you can give me." If the help is then forthcoming, that would be the appropriate time to express your thanks.

**That.** As a subordinating conjunction, *that* links the dependent clause it introduces with the main clause. *That* is often omitted (but understood).

> We realize *that* our bargaining position is not a strong one.
>
> **OR:** We realize our bargaining position is not a strong one.

However, under certain circumstances *that* should not be omitted:

**a.** When the word or phrase following *that* could be misread as the object of the verb in the main clause.

> **NOT:** I heard your speech next Wednesday had to be rescheduled.
>
> **BUT:** I heard *that* your speech next Wednesday had to be rescheduled.

**b.** When *that* introduces two or more parallel clauses.

> **NOT:** Hilary said she had narrowed the applicants for the job down to three people and that she would announce her choice by this Friday.
>
> **BUT:** Hilary said *that* she had narrowed the applicants for the job down to three people and *that* she would announce her choice by this Friday.

**c.** When an introductory or interrupting element comes between *that* and the subject of the dependent clause.

> **NOT:** I think whenever possible, you should consult everyone involved before making your decision.
>
> **BUT:** I think *that* whenever possible, you should consult everyone involved before making your decision. (See ¶130d.)

**NOTE:** If you are in doubt, do not omit *that*.

**That–where.** See *Where–that*.

**That–which–who.** See ¶1062.

**Therefore.** Beginning a sentence with *therefore* is now considered perfectly acceptable. *Therefore* (like other transitional expressions, such as *however* and *moreover*) helps readers relate the thought being introduced to the thought that went before. Many readers find it more helpful if they encounter the transitional expression at the beginning of the sentence. In that way they can tell from the outset the direction in which the new sentence is proceeding. (See also *However*.) Compare these examples:

> When you are addressing a request to someone who reports to you, you expect that person to comply. A period can be properly used, *therefore*, to punctuate such requests. Since most people prefer to be asked to do something rather than be told to do it, *however*, a question mark establishes a nicer tone and often gets better results.
>
> When you are addressing a request to someone who reports to you, you expect that person to comply. *Therefore*, a period can properly be used to punctuate such requests. *However*, since most people prefer to be asked to do something rather than be told to do it, a question mark establishes a nicer tone and often gets better results.

In any case, the location of a transitional expression in a sentence must be determined by the individual writer. (For a list of transitional expressions, see ¶138a.)

**These sort–these kind.** Incorrect; the correct forms are *this sort*, *this kind*, *these sorts*, *these kinds*. (See also Kind.)

**Titled–entitled.** See *Entitled–titled*.

**To-do.** See *Ado–adieu–to-do*.

**Toe the line–toe the mark.** In these expressions (which mean "to conform to a rule or standard"), the correct spelling of the verb is *toe* (**NOT:** *tow*).

**Together.** See *Both alike–both equal–both together*.

**Tough row to hoe.** This expression refers to hoeing a row in a garden (**NOT:** hoeing a road).

**Toward–towards.** Both forms are correct, but *toward* is more common in U.S. usage.

**Try and.** In written material use *try to* rather than the colloquial *try and*.

> Please *try to* be here on time. (**NOT:** Please *try and* be here on time.)

**Type.** See *Kind*.

**Type–key.** The verb *type* has traditionally been used to refer to actions performed on a typewriter keyboard. The verb *key* was originally introduced to refer to actions performed on a computer keyboard. However, *type* has supplanted *key* in many software manuals and even appears in screen displays.

**Uninterested–disinterested.** See *Disinterested–uninterested*.

**Unique.** Do not use *unique* in the sense of "unusual." A *unique* thing is one of a kind. (See ¶1071f.)

**Up.** Many verbs (for example, *end*, *rest*, *lift*, *connect*, *join*, *hurry*, *settle*, *burn*, *drink*, *eat*) contain the idea of "up"; therefore, the adverb *up* is unnecessary. In the following sentences, *up* should be omitted.

> You need to rest (up) for a bit. Save $50 if you join (up) now.
>
> Let's divide (up) the workload. I will call him (up) tomorrow.

**Upon–up on.** See *On–upon–up on*.

**Used to.** As a general rule, be sure to spell *used* with a *d*.

> Marcia *used to* live in Phoenix. **OR:** Marcia *used to* live in Phoenix, didn't she?

However, do not add a *d* to *use* in the expressions *did use to* and *didn't use to*.

> Marcia *didn't use to* live in Phoenix. **OR:** Didn't Marcia *use to* live in Phoenix?

**Reason:** A helping verb (in this case, *did* or *didn't*) should be followed by an infinitive (in this case, *use*) rather than a past tense form (*used*). To better understand this principle, consider another example, where *want* takes the place of *used* or *use*:

> Marcia didn't *want* to live in Phoenix. (**NOT:** didn't *wanted*.)

As an alternative to these subtle distinctions, reword to avoid *used to* or *didn't use to* altogether.

> Marcia formerly lived in Phoenix. **OR:** Marcia lived in Phoenix some time ago.
>
> Did Marcia ever live in Phoenix? **OR:** Marcia never lived in Phoenix, did she?

**Verbal.** The word *verbal* can often cause confusion because it means "expressed in words" as well as "oral, not written." Reword as necessary to make your meaning clear.

> **AMBIGUOUS:** How would you rate Sid's *verbal* skills?
>
> **CLEAR:** How would you rate Sid's ability to express himself in words?
>
> **CLEAR:** How would you rate Sid's ability to express himself orally?
>
> **CLEAR:** How would you rate Sid's ability to express himself in speech and writing?

Avoid expressions such as *verbal contracts* unless you are sure your audience knows that these are *oral agreement*s.

**Very.** This adverb can be used to modify an adjective, another adverb, a present participle, or a "descriptive" past participle.

> We are *very* happy with the outcome. (Modifying an adjective.)
>
> This finish dries *very quickly*. (Modifying an adverb.)
>
> It was a *very disappointing* showing. (Modifying a present participle.)
>
> I was *very pleased* with the pictures. (Modifying a descriptive past participle.)

When the past participle expresses action rather than description, insert an adverb like *much* after *very*.

> They are *very much* opposed to your plan. (*Opposed* is part of the complete verb *are opposed* and expresses action rather than description.)
>
> (**NOT:** They are *very* opposed to your plan.)

**Vicious circle.** The correct form is *vicious circle* (**NOT:** *vicious cycle*).

**Ways.** Do not use *ways* for *way* in referring to distance. For example, "I live a short *way* [**NOT:** *ways*] from here."

**Well–good.** See *Good–well*.

**Whatever–what ever**

> You may write on *whatever* [any] topic you wish.
>
> *What ever* made you think that was true? (*Ever* is an adverb here.)

**Where–that.** Do not use *where* in place of *that*.

> I saw in yesterday's paper *that* Schuster's had decided to close its midtown store.
>
> (**NOT:** I saw in yesterday's paper *where* Schuster's had decided to close its midtown store.)

**Whether–if.** See *If–whether*.

**Which.** Traditionally, the use of *which* to refer to a previous clause in a sentence has been frowned upon, but it is now considered acceptable if it is not overdone.

> Nick Farnsworth promised to forward my movie script to his own agent, *which* he did. (Here *which* refers to the entire main clause in the sentence.)

Avoid this usage when simpler means of expression are readily available.

> **AVOID:** Some legal writing will not be comprehensible to people without legal training, *which* is to say, it may refer to legal principles unfamiliar to lay readers.
>
> **BETTER:** Some legal writing will not be comprehensible to people without legal training; that is to say, it may refer to legal principles unfamiliar to lay readers.

**While.** *While* has two meanings: "during the time that" and "although."

> *While* [during the time that] Sam was here as a summer intern, he did a great job in cleaning up our mailing lists.
>
> *While* [although] I understand your objections, I feel that I must proceed as I had planned.

Ordinarily, the context makes it clear which meaning is intended, but reword in cases where the use of *while* could cause confusion.

**Who–which–that.** See ¶1062.

**Who–whom.** See ¶1061.

**Whoever–who ever.** See ¶1061.

> *Whoever* [anyone who] made such a statement should be fired.
>
> *Who ever* made such a statement? (*Ever* is an adverb here.)

**Will–shall.** See *Shall–will*.

**Wise.** Avoid the temptation to coin new words by attaching the suffix *wise* to various nouns. (Stylewise, it's considered bad form.)

> **NOT:** *Costwise*, we're already 20 percent over budget.
>
> **BUT:** We're already 20 percent over budget on costs.
>
> **NOT:** *Sizewise*, what comes after extra large? Gross? (Even when used in a conscious attempt at humor, the approach leaves much to be desired. Once again, avoid the temptation.)
>
> **BUT:** *In terms of size*, what comes after extra large? Gross?

**NOTE:** A number of words ending in *wise* are quite acceptable. For example:

| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| clockwise | crosswise | lengthwise | otherwise |
| counterclockwise | edgewise | likewise | sidewise |

In the examples above, *wise* is a suffix meaning "with regard to" or "in the manner of." *Wise* (in the sense of "knowledgeable about") is also used in compound adjectives like these:

| | | | |
|---|---|---|---|
| penny-wise | weather-wise | worldly-wise | streetwise |

Such words are also quite acceptable.

**Worse–worst.** The expression "if worst comes to worst" is more commonly used than "if worse comes to worst," but both versions are considered correct.

**Would–should.** See *Should–would*.

**Would have–would of.** Note that the second word in this verb phrase is *have*. The form *would of* is wrong. (See *Of–have*.)

> I myself *would have* [**NOT:** would of] taken a different tack.

As a general rule, when a clause begins with *if*, do not use *would have* in place of *had*.

> If you *had* come early, you could have talked with Dr. Fernandez yourself.
>
> (**NOT:** If you *would have* come early, you could have talked with Dr. Fernandez yourself.)

➠ *For a few exceptions to this general rule, see ¶1040b*.

**Wrack–rack.** See *Rack–wrack*.
